Acute complications of diabetes mellitus include diabetic ketoacidosis and hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state.
Alcoholic ketoacidosis is discussed in the context of diabetes mellitus due to overlap in physiology and treatment of alcoholic ketoacidosis and diabetes mellitus.
Diabetic ketoacidosis is an acute metabolic complication of diabetes mellitus characterized by hyperglycemia, hyperketonemia, and metabolic acidosis.
Hyperglycemia causes an osmotic diuresis with significant fluid and electrolyte loss in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis.
Diabetic ketoacidosis occurs mostly in patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus.
Diabetic ketoacidosis causes nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis.
Diabetic ketoacidosis can progress to cerebral edema, coma, and death in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis.
Diabetic ketoacidosis is diagnosed by detection of hyperketonemia and anion gap metabolic acidosis in the presence of hyperglycemia in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis.
Treatment of diabetic ketoacidosis involves volume expansion, insulin replacement, and prevention of hypokalemia in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis.
Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) occurs primarily in patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus and is less common in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) develops when insulin levels are insufficient to meet the body's basic metabolic requirements.
Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) is the first manifestation of type 1 diabetes mellitus in approximately one-third of patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus.
Insulin deficiency can be absolute, for example, during lapses in the administration of exogenous insulin to patients with diabetes mellitus.
Insulin deficiency can be relative, for example, when usual insulin doses do not meet metabolic needs during physiologic stress in patients with diabetes mellitus.
Acute infection, such as pneumonia, urinary tract infection, or COVID-19, can trigger diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) in patients with diabetes mellitus.
Myocardial infarction can trigger diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) in patients with diabetes mellitus.
Stroke can trigger diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) in patients with diabetes mellitus.
Pancreatitis can trigger diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) in patients with diabetes mellitus.
Pregnancy can trigger diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) in patients with diabetes mellitus.
Trauma can trigger diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) in patients with diabetes mellitus.
Missed insulin doses can trigger diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) in patients with diabetes mellitus.
Sodium glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT-2) inhibitors are medications that can cause diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) in patients with diabetes mellitus.
Glucocorticoids are medications that can cause diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) in patients with diabetes mellitus.
Thiazide diuretics are medications that can cause diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) in patients with diabetes mellitus.
Sympathomimetics are medications that can cause diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) in patients with diabetes mellitus.
Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) is less common in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus, but it may occur in situations of unusual physiologic stress in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Ketosis-prone type 2 diabetes, also referred to as Flatbush diabetes, is a variant of type 2 diabetes mellitus that sometimes occurs in patients with obesity, often those with African ancestry.
Patients with ketosis-prone type 2 diabetes can have significant impairment of beta-cell function with hyperglycemia.
Patients with ketosis-prone type 2 diabetes are more likely to develop diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) when significant hyperglycemia occurs in patients with ketosis-prone type 2 diabetes.
SGLT-2 inhibitors have been implicated in causing Diabetic Ketoacidosis in both type 1 diabetes and type 2 diabetes.
In pregnant patients taking SGLT2 inhibitors, Diabetic Ketoacidosis may occur at lower or even normal blood glucose levels, which is known as euglycemic Diabetic Ketoacidosis.
In patients taking SGLT2 inhibitors, euglycemic Diabetic Ketoacidosis, which is ketoacidosis without elevated glucose levels, can occur.
Euglycemic Diabetic Ketoacidosis can also occur with alcohol overuse.
Euglycemic Diabetic Ketoacidosis can also occur with cirrhosis.
The association of Diabetic Ketoacidosis at onset, diabetes technology uptake, and clinical outcomes after 1 and 2 years of follow-up was analyzed in a collaborative analysis of pediatric registries involving 9,269 children with type 1 diabetes from nine countries.
Ketosis-Prone Diabetes, also known as Flatbush Diabetes, is an emerging worldwide clinically important entity.
Sodium-Glucose Cotransporter-2 Inhibitors and Diabetic-Ketoacidosis in type 2 diabetes mellitus patients were analyzed in an updated meta-analysis and a Mendelian randomization analysis.
Diabetic Ketoacidosis is caused by insulin deficiency and an increase in counterregulatory hormones, such as glucagon, catecholamines, and cortisol, which causes the body to metabolize triglycerides and amino acids instead of glucose for energy.
The body metabolizes triglycerides and amino acids instead of glucose for energy due to insulin deficiency and an increase in counterregulatory hormones, such as glucagon, catecholamines, and cortisol, in Diabetic Ketoacidosis.
Serum levels of glycerol and free fatty acids rise in Diabetic Ketoacidosis because of unrestrained lipolysis caused by insulin deficiency.
Alanine levels rise in Diabetic Ketoacidosis because of muscle catabolism caused by insulin deficiency.
Glycerol and alanine provide substrate for hepatic gluconeogenesis in Diabetic Ketoacidosis, which is stimulated by the excess of glucagon that accompanies insulin deficiency.
Glucagon stimulates mitochondrial conversion of free fatty acids into ketones in Diabetic Ketoacidosis.
Insulin normally blocks ketogenesis by inhibiting the transport of free fatty acid derivatives into the mitochondrial matrix in Diabetic Ketoacidosis, but ketogenesis proceeds in the absence of insulin.
The major ketoacids produced in Diabetic Ketoacidosis, acetoacetic acid and beta-hydroxybutyric acid, are strong organic acids that create metabolic acidosis.
Acetone derived from the metabolism of acetoacetic acid accumulates in serum and is slowly disposed of by respiration in Diabetic Ketoacidosis.
Hyperglycemia due to insulin deficiency in Diabetic Ketoacidosis causes an osmotic diuresis that leads to marked urinary losses of water and electrolytes.
Urinary excretion of ketones in Diabetic Ketoacidosis obligates additional losses of sodium and potassium.
Serum sodium in Diabetic Ketoacidosis may fall due to natriuresis or rise due to excretion of large volumes of free water.
Potassium is lost in large quantities.
A significant total body deficit of potassium exists, despite initial serum potassium levels being typically normal or elevated due to the extracellular migration of potassium in response to acidosis.
Potassium levels generally fall further during treatment as insulin therapy drives potassium into cells.
If serum potassium is not monitored and replaced as needed, life-threatening hypokalemia may develop in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis.
Diabetic ketoacidosis includes symptoms of hyperglycemia, such as nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain, particularly in children with diabetic ketoacidosis.
Lethargy and somnolence are symptoms of more severe decompensation in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis.
Patients with diabetic ketoacidosis may be hypotensive and tachycardic due to dehydration and acidosis.
Patients with diabetic ketoacidosis may breathe rapidly and deeply to compensate for acidemia, which is characterized by Kussmaul respirations.
Patients with diabetic ketoacidosis may have fruity breath due to exhaled acetone.
Fever is not a sign of diabetic ketoacidosis itself and, if present, signifies an underlying infection in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis.
In the absence of timely treatment, diabetic ketoacidosis progresses to coma and death in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis.
Acute cerebral edema is a complication in less than 1% of patients with diabetic ketoacidosis.
Acute cerebral edema occurs primarily in children with diabetic ketoacidosis and less often in adolescents and young adults with diabetic ketoacidosis.
Headache and fluctuating level of consciousness herald acute cerebral edema in some patients with diabetic ketoacidosis.
Respiratory arrest is the initial manifestation of acute cerebral edema in other patients with diabetic ketoacidosis.
The cause of acute cerebral edema in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis is not well understood but may be related to too-rapid reductions in serum osmolality.
The cause of acute cerebral edema in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis may be related to brain ischemia.
Patients with diabetic ketoacidosis who have the highest blood urea nitrogen levels at presentation appear to be at greatest risk of developing acute cerebral edema.
Patients with diabetic ketoacidosis who have the lowest PaCO2 at presentation appear to be at greatest risk of developing acute cerebral edema.
Delays in correction of hyponatremia in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis are a possible risk factor for acute cerebral edema.
The use of bicarbonate during diabetic ketoacidosis treatment is a possible risk factor for acute cerebral edema.
Patients suspected of having diabetic ketoacidosis should have serum electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, glucose, ketones, and osmolarity measured.
Urine of patients suspected of having diabetic ketoacidosis should be tested for ketones.
Patients with diabetic ketoacidosis who appear significantly ill and have positive ketones should have arterial blood gas measurement.
Diagnostic criteria for diabetic ketoacidosis include arterial or venous pH less than 7.30.
Diagnostic criteria for diabetic ketoacidosis include anion gap greater than 10 to 12 mEq/L.
Diagnostic criteria for diabetic ketoacidosis include serum bicarbonate less than 15 to 18 mEq/L.
Diagnostic criteria for diabetic ketoacidosis include the presence of serum or urine ketones.
Diagnostic criteria for diabetic ketoacidosis include serum glucose greater than 200 to 250 mg/dL.
Some guidelines for diabetic ketoacidosis diagnosis do not require a specific serum glucose level and allow the presence of known diabetes to substitute for a specific glucose cutoff.
Diabetic ketoacidosis can occur in patients with normal or mildly elevated glucose levels, also known as euglycemic diabetic ketoacidosis.
A presumptive diagnosis of diabetic ketoacidosis may be made when urine glucose and ketones are positive on urinalysis of patients suspected of having diabetic ketoacidosis.
Urine test strips for diabetic ketoacidosis detection may underestimate the degree of ketosis because they detect acetoacetic acid and not beta-hydroxybutyric acid.
Some assays for serum ketones in diabetic ketoacidosis detection may underestimate the degree of ketosis because they detect acetoacetic acid and not beta-hydroxybutyric acid.
Beta-hydroxybutyrate in the blood of patients with diabetic ketoacidosis can be measured.
Treatment of diabetic ketoacidosis can be initiated based on clinical suspicion and the presence of anion gap acidosis if serum or urine ketones are low in patients suspected of having diabetic ketoacidosis.
Symptoms and signs of a triggering illness should be pursued with appropriate studies, such as cultures and imaging studies.
Adults should have an electrocardiogram to screen for acute myocardial infarction and to help determine the significance of abnormalities in serum potassium levels in adults.
Hyponatremia is a laboratory abnormality that may be present in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis.
Elevated serum creatinine is a laboratory abnormality that may be present in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis.
Elevated plasma osmolality is a laboratory abnormality that may be present in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis.
Hypokalemia may be present in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis after correction of acidosis.
Elevated serum amylase and lipase are laboratory abnormalities that may be present in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis.
Hyperglycemia may cause dilutional hyponatremia in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis, so measured serum sodium is corrected by adding 1.6 mEq/L for each 100 mg/dL elevation of serum glucose over 100 mg/dL in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis.
The Sodium Correction in Hyperglycemia calculator, also known as the Katz formula, is a clinical calculator that can be used to correct measured serum sodium in patients with hyperglycemia.
As acidosis is corrected in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis, serum potassium levels drop in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis.
An initial potassium level less than 4.5 mEq/L indicates marked potassium depletion in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis and requires immediate potassium supplementation in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis.
Serum amylase and lipase are often elevated in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis, even in the absence of pancreatitis in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis.
The Anion Gap calculator is a clinical calculator that can be used to calculate the anion gap in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis.
The American Diabetes Association and the European Association for the Study of Diabetes published a consensus report in 2020 that provides guidance on the management of hyperglycemia in type 2 diabetes.
The treatment of diabetic ketoacidosis includes fluid resuscitation with intravenous 0.9% saline.
The treatment of diabetic ketoacidosis includes correction of hypokalemia.
Intravenous insulin is administered for the treatment of diabetic ketoacidosis as long as serum potassium is ≥ 3.3 mEq/L.
Intravenous sodium bicarbonate is rarely administered for the treatment of diabetic ketoacidosis if pH is < 7 after 1 hour of treatment.
The most urgent goals for treating diabetic ketoacidosis are rapid intravascular volume repletion, correction of hyperglycemia and acidosis, and prevention of hypokalemia.
Identification of precipitating factors of diabetic ketoacidosis is important.
Treatment of most cases of diabetic ketoacidosis should occur in intensive care settings.
Clinical and laboratory assessments of diabetic ketoacidosis are initially needed every hour or every other hour with appropriate adjustments in treatment.
Milder cases of diabetic ketoacidosis may be managed with subcutaneous insulin every 1 to 2 hours in a step-down or emergency room.
Intravascular volume should be restored rapidly to raise blood pressure and ensure glomerular perfusion in patients.
Initial volume resuscitation in adults is typically achieved with rapid IV infusion of 1 to 1.5 L of 0.9% saline solution in the first hour.
The initial volume resuscitation is followed by saline infusions at 250 to 500 mL/hour in adults.
Additional boluses or a faster rate of infusion of saline solution may be needed to correct hypotension in patients.
Slower rates of infusion of saline solution may be needed in patients with heart failure.
Slower rates of infusion of saline solution may be needed in patients at risk for volume overload.
If the serum sodium level is normal or high in patients, the normal saline is replaced by 0.45% saline after initial volume resuscitation.
Once intravascular volume is restored in patients, remaining total body water deficits are corrected more slowly, typically over about 24 hours.
When plasma glucose falls to < 200 mg/dL (< 11.1 mmol/L) in patients, IV fluid should be changed.
IV fluid should be changed to 0.45% saline with 5% to 10% dextrose added when plasma glucose falls to < 200 mg/dL (< 11.1 mmol/L) in patients.
Adults with hyperglycemia and acidosis may be given an initial bolus of regular insulin 0.1 unit/kg IV bolus.
Adults with hyperglycemia and acidosis should be administered a continuous IV infusion of regular insulin 0.1 unit/kg/hour in 0.9% saline solution, whether or not an initial bolus of regular insulin has been given.
Regular insulin should be withheld until the serum potassium level of the patient is ≥ 3.3 mEq/L (≥ 3.3 mmol/L).
Insulin adsorption onto IV tubing can lead to inconsistent effects of regular insulin, which can be minimized by preflushing the IV tubing with regular insulin solution.
If the plasma glucose level of the patient does not fall by 50 to 75 mg/dL (2.8 to 4.2 mmol/L) in the first hour, the insulin doses of regular insulin should be doubled.
Ketones should begin to clear within hours if sufficient doses of regular insulin are given to the patient.
The clearance of ketones may appear to lag because of the conversion of beta-hydroxybutyrate to acetoacetate as acidosis resolves in the patient.
The serum pH level of the patient should quickly improve after administration of regular insulin.
The bicarbonate levels of the patient should also quickly improve after administration of regular insulin.
The restoration of a normal serum bicarbonate level in the patient may take 24 hours after administration of regular insulin.
Bicarbonate should not be given routinely to patients with hyperglycemia and acidosis because it can lead to the development of acute cerebral edema, primarily in children with hyperglycemia and acidosis.
Bicarbonate should be started only if the pH level of the patient is < 7.
Only modest pH elevation should be attempted with doses of 50 to 100 mEq (50 to 100 mmol) of bicarbonate given over 2 hours to patients with hyperglycemia and acidosis.
The doses of 50 to 100 mEq (50 to 100 mmol) of bicarbonate should be given over 2 hours to patients with hyperglycemia and acidosis, followed by repeat measurement of the arterial pH and serum potassium levels of the patient.
When plasma glucose becomes less than 250 mg/dL in adults, 5% to 10% dextrose should be added to IV fluids to reduce the risk of hypoglycemia in adults.
The dextrose concentration can be adjusted and the insulin dose can be reduced to maintain glucose levels between 150 to 200 mg/dL in adults.
The continuous IV infusion of regular insulin should be maintained until the anion gap has narrowed on 2 consecutive blood tests and blood and urine are consistently negative for ketones in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis.
A longer duration of treatment with insulin and dextrose may be required in diabetic ketoacidosis associated with SGLT-2 inhibitor use.
When the patient is stable and able to eat, a typical basal-bolus insulin regimen is begun for the patient.
IV insulin should be continued for 2 hours after the initial dose of basal subcutaneous insulin is given to the patient.
Prevention of hypokalemia in patients requires replacement of 20 to 30 mEq potassium in each liter of IV fluid to keep serum potassium levels between 4 and 5 mEq/L in patients.
If serum potassium levels are less than 3.3 mEq/L in patients, insulin should be withheld or stopped temporarily and potassium should be given at 40 mEq/hour to patients until serum potassium levels are greater than or equal to 3.3 mEq/L.
If serum potassium levels are greater than 5 mEq/L in patients, potassium supplementation can be withheld from patients.
Initially normal or elevated serum potassium measurements in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis may reflect shifts from intracellular stores in response to acidemia and belie the true potassium deficits that almost all patients with diabetic ketoacidosis have.
Insulin replacement rapidly shifts potassium into cells in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis, so serum potassium levels should be checked hourly or every other hour in the initial stages of treatment for diabetic ketoacidosis.
Hypophosphatemia often develops during treatment of diabetic ketoacidosis, but phosphate repletion does not appear to be of benefit except for cases of severe hypophosphatemia in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis.
Phosphate repletion is of benefit in cases of severe hypophosphatemia, which is defined as a phosphate level of less than 0.78 mg/dL or less than 0.32 mmol/L in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis.
Potassium phosphate can be infused over 6 to 12 hours at a dose of 1 to 2 mmol/kg of phosphate in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis if indicated, for example, if rhabdomyolysis, hemolysis, or neurologic deterioration occurs.
If potassium phosphate is given to patients with diabetic ketoacidosis, the serum calcium level usually decreases and should be monitored.
Treatment of suspected cerebral edema in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis is hyperventilation, glucocorticoids, and mannitol.
Hyperventilation, glucocorticoids, and mannitol are often ineffective after the onset of respiratory arrest in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis who have suspected cerebral edema.
The American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee published guidelines for glycemic goals and hypoglycemia in Diabetes Care in 2025.
The Joint British Diabetes Societies for Inpatient Care published an updated guideline for the management of diabetic ketoacidosis in adults in Diabet Med in 2022.
The overall mortality rates for diabetic ketoacidosis are less than 1%.
Mortality is higher in older patients with diabetic ketoacidosis.
Mortality is higher in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis who have other life-threatening illnesses.
Type 2 diabetes is associated with an increased risk of mortality in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis.
Sepsis is associated with an increased risk of mortality in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis.
Altered level of consciousness is associated with an increased risk of mortality in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis.
Obesity is associated with an increased risk of mortality in patients with diabetic ketoacidosis.
Cerebral edema in adults with diabetic ketoacidosis is very rare.
The American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee published the Standards of Care in Diabetes-2025.
The ISPAD Clinical Practice Consensus Guidelines 2018 provide guidance on diabetic ketoacidosis and the hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state.
Tran TTT and colleagues reviewed the evidence for adult diabetic ketoacidosis management protocols.
Umpierrez G and Korytkowski M discussed diabetic emergencies, including ketoacidosis, hyperglycaemic hyperosmolar state, and hypoglycaemia.
Eledrisi MS and colleagues studied the clinical characteristics and outcomes of care in patients hospitalized with diabetic ketoacidosis.
Diabetic ketoacidosis is an acute metabolic complication of diabetes characterized by hyperglycemia, hyperketonemia, and metabolic acidosis.
Diabetic ketoacidosis can occur when acute physiologic stressors, such as infections or myocardial infarction, trigger acidosis, moderate glucose elevation, dehydration, and severe potassium loss, particularly in patients with type 1 diabetes.
Diabetic ketoacidosis is diagnosed by an arterial pH less than 7.30, the presence of serum or urine ketones, hyperglycemia, decreased serum bicarbonate, and/or increased anion gap.
Acidosis and hyperglycemia in diabetic ketoacidosis are corrected with intravenous fluid and insulin.
Insulin is withheld in diabetic ketoacidosis patients until serum potassium is greater than or equal to 3.3 mEq/L or greater than or equal to 3.3 mmol/L.
Acute cerebral edema is a rare but lethal complication of diabetic ketoacidosis.
Hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state is a metabolic complication of diabetes mellitus characterized by severe hyperglycemia, extreme dehydration, hyperosmolar plasma, and altered consciousness.
Hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state most often occurs in type 2 diabetes, often in the setting of physiologic stress.
Hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state is diagnosed by severe hyperglycemia and plasma hyperosmolality in the absence of significant ketosis.
Treatment of hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state is IV saline solution and insulin.
Complications of hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state include coma, seizures, and death.
Hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state is a complication of type 2 diabetes mellitus and has an estimated mortality rate of up to approximately 2%.
The mortality rate of hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state is higher than the mortality rate for diabetic ketoacidosis.
Hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state usually develops after a period of symptomatic hyperglycemia in which fluid intake is inadequate to prevent extreme dehydration due to the hyperglycemia-induced osmotic diuresis.
Acute infections and other medical conditions are precipitating factors of hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state.
Medications that impair glucose tolerance, such as glucocorticoids, are precipitating factors of hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state.
Medications that increase fluid loss, such as diuretics, are precipitating factors of hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state.
Nonadherence to diabetes treatment is a precipitating factor of hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state.
Type 2 diabetes patients have adequate amounts of insulin to suppress ketogenesis, which is why serum ketones are not present in type 2 diabetes patients.
Most type 2 diabetes patients endure a significantly longer period of osmotic diuresis due to high solute concentrations from glucose in the renal tubules, leading to excess water loss.
Osmotic diuresis causes more severe dehydration in type 2 diabetes patients before presentation.
Type 2 diabetes patients typically have higher plasma glucose levels, greater than 600 mg/dL, than diabetic ketoacidosis patients.
Type 2 diabetes patients typically have higher osmolality levels, greater than 320 mOsm/L, than diabetic ketoacidosis patients.
The primary symptom of hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state is altered consciousness, varying from confusion or disorientation to coma, usually as a result of extreme dehydration with or without prerenal azotemia, hyperglycemia, and hyperosmolality in hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state patients.
Hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state patients may experience focal or generalized seizures.
Hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state patients may experience transient hemiplegia.
The diagnostic criteria for hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state include a plasma glucose level of ≥ 600 mg/dL.
The diagnostic criteria for hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state include a serum osmolality of > 300 mOsm/kg.
The diagnostic criteria for hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state include an absence of ketosis, defined as urine ketones < 2+ or beta-hydroxybutyrate < 3.0 mmol/L.
The diagnostic criteria for hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state include an absence of acidosis, defined as a pH ≥ 7.3 and serum bicarbonate ≥ 15 mEq/L.
Hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state is initially suspected when a markedly elevated glucose level is found in a fingerstick specimen obtained in the course of an evaluation of altered mental status in patients with hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state.
Urine should be tested for ketones in patients with hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state if measurements have not already been obtained.
Serum electrolytes should be measured in a blood sample of patients with hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state.
Blood urea nitrogen should be measured in a blood sample of patients with hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state.
Creatinine should be measured in a blood sample of patients with hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state.
Glucose should be measured in a blood sample of patients with hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state.
Ketones should be measured in a blood sample of patients with hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state.
Plasma osmolality should be measured in a blood sample of patients with hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state.
Serum potassium levels are usually normal in patients with hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state.
Sodium levels may be low or high in patients with hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state, depending on volume deficits in patients with hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state.
Hyperglycemia may cause dilutional hyponatremia in patients with hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state.
Measured serum sodium is corrected by adding 1.6 mEq/L for each 100 mg/dL elevation of serum glucose over 100 mg/dL in patients with hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state.
BUN and serum creatinine levels are markedly increased in patients with hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state.
Arterial pH is usually greater than 7.3 in patients with hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state.
Mild metabolic acidosis may develop due to lactate accumulation in patients with hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state.
The fluid deficit can exceed 10 L in patients with hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state.
Acute circulatory collapse is a common cause of death in patients with hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state.
Widespread thrombosis is a frequent finding on autopsy in patients with hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state.
Bleeding may occur as a consequence of disseminated intravascular coagulation in patients with hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state.
Aspiration pneumonia is a complication of hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state.
Acute renal failure is a complication of hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state.
Acute respiratory distress syndrome is a complication of hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state.
Diabetic Ketoacidosis and Hyperosmolar Hyperglycemic State often have overlapping features.
Mild ketonemia often occurs in individuals with Hyperosmolar Hyperglycemic State.
If significant ketonemia and acidosis are present in a patient with Hyperosmolar Hyperglycemic State and Diabetic Ketoacidosis overlap, insulin should be administered according to Diabetic Ketoacidosis protocols.
All patients with Hyperosmolar Hyperglycemic State should be hospitalized and managed in the intensive care setting.
Treatment of Hyperosmolar Hyperglycemic State consists of intravenous 0.9% saline, correction of hypokalemia, and intravenous insulin.
Intravenous insulin should be administered to patients with Hyperosmolar Hyperglycemic State as long as serum potassium is ≥ 3.3 mEq/L or ≥ 3.3 mmol/L.
The American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee provides standards of care in diabetes, including glycemic goals and hypoglycemia.
Intravenous 0.9% saline solution is used for treatment of Hyperosmolar Hyperglycemic State, with 1000 mL given in the first hour.
Smaller boluses of 500 mL of intravenous 0.9% saline solution can be given to patients with Hyperosmolar Hyperglycemic State if there is risk for exacerbation of heart failure or volume overload.
Additional boluses of intravenous 0.9% saline solution may be needed for patients with Hyperosmolar Hyperglycemic State who are hypotensive.
After the first hour, intravenous fluids should be adjusted based on hemodynamic and electrolyte status of patients with Hyperosmolar Hyperglycemic State.
Intravenous fluids should generally be continued at a rate of 250 to 500 mL/hour for patients with Hyperosmolar Hyperglycemic State.
A corrected sodium level for the patient should be calculated.
If the corrected sodium level for the patient is less than 135 mEq/L, then isotonic saline can be continued for the patient.
If the corrected sodium level for the patient is normal or elevated, then 0.45% saline should be used for the patient.
Dextrose should be added to the patient's treatment once the glucose level for the patient reaches 250 to 300 mg/dL.
The rate of infusion of IV fluids for the patient should be adjusted depending on the blood pressure of the patient, the cardiac status of the patient, and the balance between fluid input and output for the patient.
Insulin is given as a 0.05 unit/kg/hour infusion to the patient after the first liter of saline has been infused for the patient and hypokalemia has been corrected for the patient.
Hydration alone can sometimes precipitously decrease the plasma glucose level of the patient, so the insulin dose for the patient may need to be reduced.
A too-quick reduction in osmolality can lead to cerebral edema in the patient.
Occasional patients with insulin-resistant type 2 diabetes and hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state require larger insulin doses than other patients.
Once the plasma glucose level of the patient reaches 300 mg/dL, the insulin infusion for the patient should be reduced to basal levels until rehydration is complete for the patient and the patient is able to eat.
If significant ketonemia and acidosis are present in a patient with hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state and diabetic ketoacidosis overlap, insulin should be administered to the patient according to diabetic ketoacidosis protocols.
The target plasma glucose level for the patient is between 250 and 300 mg/dL.
After recovery from the acute episode, patients are usually switched to adjusted doses of subcutaneous insulin for their treatment.
Potassium replacement for patients with serum potassium levels less than 3.3 mEq/L is 40 mEq/hour.
Potassium replacement for patients with serum potassium levels between 3.3 and 4.9 mEq/L is 20 to 30 mEq/hour.
Potassium replacement is not necessary for patients with serum potassium levels greater than or equal to 5 mEq/L.