Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus is characterized by insulin resistance and inadequate insulin secretion relative to the needs of patients with Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus.
Early symptoms of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus are related to hyperglycemia and include polydipsia, polyphagia, polyuria, and blurred vision in patients with Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus.
Later complications of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus include vascular disease, peripheral neuropathy, nephropathy, and predisposition to infection in patients with Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus.
Diagnosis of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus is by measuring plasma glucose in patients with suspected Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus.
Treatment of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus includes diet, exercise, and medications that reduce glucose levels, including insulin, oral antihyperglycemic medications, and non-insulin injectable medications for patients with Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus.
Complications of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus can be delayed or prevented with adequate glycemic control in patients with Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus.
Cardiovascular disease remains the leading cause of mortality in patients with Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus.
Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus is caused by resistance to insulin in patients with Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus.
Type 2 diabetes mellitus is characterized by inadequate insulin secretion because patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus have developed resistance to insulin.
Hepatic insulin resistance in type 2 diabetes mellitus leads to an inability to suppress hepatic glucose production in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Peripheral insulin resistance in type 2 diabetes mellitus impairs peripheral glucose uptake in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus.
The combination of hepatic insulin resistance and peripheral insulin resistance in type 2 diabetes mellitus gives rise to fasting and postprandial hyperglycemia in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Insulin levels in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus are often very high, especially early in the course of type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Later in the course of type 2 diabetes mellitus, insulin production in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus may fall, further exacerbating hyperglycemia in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Type 2 diabetes mellitus generally develops in adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus and becomes more common with increasing age in adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Approximately 30% of adults aged 18 to 44 years in the United States have impaired fasting glucose regulation or impaired glucose tolerance, which are characteristics of type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Nearly 50% of adults older than 65 years in the United States have impaired fasting glucose regulation or impaired glucose tolerance, which are characteristics of type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Plasma glucose levels in older adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus reach higher levels after eating than in younger adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus, especially after meals with high carbohydrate loads.
Glucose levels in older adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus take longer to return to normal after eating than in younger adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus.
The increased accumulation of visceral and abdominal fat and decreased muscle mass in older adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus contribute to the delayed return of glucose levels to normal after eating.
Type 2 diabetes mellitus has become more common among children with type 2 diabetes mellitus because childhood obesity has become epidemic.
More than 90% of adults with diabetes have type 2 diabetes.
Type 2 diabetes has both environmental and genetic determinants, as evidenced by the high prevalence of type 2 diabetes in relatives of people with type 2 diabetes.
Although several genetic polymorphisms have been identified, no single gene responsible for the most common forms of type 2 diabetes has been identified.
The pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes is complex and incompletely understood.
Hyperglycemia develops in patients with type 2 diabetes when insulin secretion can no longer compensate for insulin resistance in patients with type 2 diabetes.
Insulin resistance is characteristic in patients with type 2 diabetes and in people at risk of type 2 diabetes.
Patients with type 2 diabetes also exhibit beta cell dysfunction and impaired insulin secretion that progresses over time in patients with type 2 diabetes.
Patients with type 2 diabetes exhibit impaired first-phase insulin secretion.
Patients with type 2 diabetes exhibit a loss of normally pulsatile insulin secretion.
Patients with type 2 diabetes exhibit an increase in proinsulin secretion signaling, indicating impaired insulin processing in patients with type 2 diabetes.
Patients with type 2 diabetes exhibit an accumulation of islet amyloid polypeptide, a protein normally secreted with insulin in patients with type 2 diabetes.
Hyperglycemia itself may impair insulin secretion in patients with type 2 diabetes, because high glucose levels desensitize beta cells in patients with type 2 diabetes.
High glucose levels cause beta cell dysfunction, also known as glucose toxicity, in patients with type 2 diabetes.
High glucose levels may cause both beta cell dysfunction and desensitization of beta cells in patients with type 2 diabetes.
Obesity and weight gain are important determinants of insulin resistance in type 2 diabetes.
Type 2 diabetes has some genetic determinants, but type 2 diabetes also reflects diet, exercise, and lifestyle of patients with type 2 diabetes.
An inability to suppress lipolysis in adipose tissue of patients with type 2 diabetes increases plasma levels of free fatty acids that may impair insulin-stimulated glucose transport and muscle glycogen synthase activity in patients with type 2 diabetes.
Adipose tissue of patients with type 2 diabetes also functions as an endocrine organ, releasing multiple factors, such as adipocytokines, that favorably influence glucose metabolism through adiponectin and adversely influence glucose metabolism through tumor necrosis factor-alpha, interleukin-6, leptin, and resistin.
Intrauterine growth restriction and low birth weight have also been associated with insulin resistance in later life of patients with type 2 diabetes and may reflect adverse prenatal environmental influences on glucose metabolism of patients with type 2 diabetes.
The etiology of type 2 diabetes is discussed in the publication by Echouffo-Tcheugui and colleagues, titled Diagnosis and Management of Prediabetes: A Review, published in JAMA in 2023.
The US Preventive Services Task Force recommends screening for prediabetes and type 2 diabetes in children and adolescents, as stated in the US Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement published in JAMA in 2022.
The American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee provides standards of care in diabetes, including diagnosis and classification of diabetes, in the publication titled 2, Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes: Standards of Care in Diabetes-2025, published in Diabetes Care in 2025.
Type 2 diabetes has several risk factors, including age ≥ 35 years.
Type 2 diabetes has several risk factors, including overweight or obesity, which is defined as a body mass index > 25 kg/m2 or > 23 kg/m2 in individuals of Asian descent.
Type 2 diabetes has several risk factors, including physical inactivity.
Type 2 diabetes has several risk factors, including a family history of type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Type 2 diabetes has several risk factors, including a history of impaired glucose regulation, also known as prediabetes.
Type 2 diabetes has several risk factors, including a history of gestational diabetes mellitus.
Type 2 diabetes has several risk factors, including a history of delivering a baby > 4.1 kg.
Type 2 diabetes has several risk factors, including hypertension.
Type 2 diabetes has several risk factors, including dyslipidemia, which is characterized by high-density lipoprotein cholesterol < 35 mg/dL or triglyceride level > 250 mg/dL.
Type 2 diabetes has several risk factors, including a history of cardiovascular disease.
Type 2 diabetes has several risk factors, including polycystic ovary syndrome.
Xu G and colleagues published a study on the prevalence of diagnosed type 1 and type 2 diabetes among US adults in 2016 and 2017.
Nathan DM published an article on advances in the diagnosis and treatment of diabetes.
Laakso M and Fernandes Silva published a review on the genetics of type 2 diabetes, covering the past, present, and future of the field.
Crume TL and colleagues conducted a study on the long-term impact of intrauterine growth restriction in a diverse US cohort of children, known as the EPOCH study.
Darendeliler F published an article on intrauterine growth restriction, discussing genetic influences, metabolic problems, environmental associations, and current and future management.
People of African ancestry should be screened for diabetes with a fasting plasma glucose level, glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1C), or a 2-hour value on a 75-g oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) at least once every 3 years as long as plasma glucose measurements are normal.
People of Spanish ancestry should be screened for diabetes with a fasting plasma glucose level, glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1C), or a 2-hour value on a 75-g oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) at least once every 3 years as long as plasma glucose measurements are normal.
People of Latin American ancestry should be screened for diabetes with a fasting plasma glucose level, glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1C), or a 2-hour value on a 75-g oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) at least once every 3 years as long as plasma glucose measurements are normal.
People of Asian ancestry should be screened for diabetes with a fasting plasma glucose level, glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1C), or a 2-hour value on a 75-g oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) at least once every 3 years as long as plasma glucose measurements are normal.
People of American Indian ancestry should be screened for diabetes with a fasting plasma glucose level, glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1C), or a 2-hour value on a 75-g oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) at least once every 3 years as long as plasma glucose measurements are normal.
Adults with metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease should be screened for diabetes with a fasting plasma glucose level, glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1C), or a 2-hour value on a 75-g oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) at least once every 3 years as long as plasma glucose measurements are normal.
Adults with HIV infection should be screened for diabetes with a fasting plasma glucose level, glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1C), or a 2-hour value on a 75-g oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) at least once every 3 years as long as plasma glucose measurements are normal.
All adults aged 35 years or older with one or more risk factors should be screened for diabetes with a fasting plasma glucose level, glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1C), or a 2-hour value on a 75-g oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) at least once every 3 years as long as plasma glucose measurements are normal.
All adults aged 35 years or older with one or more risk factors should be screened for diabetes with a fasting plasma glucose level, glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1C), or a 2-hour value on a 75-g oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) at least annually if results reveal impaired fasting glucose levels.
Individuals taking second-generation antipsychotic medications should also be screened for prediabetes and diabetes.
Individuals taking long-term glucocorticoids should also be screened for prediabetes and diabetes.
Individuals taking statins should also be screened for prediabetes and diabetes.
Individuals taking some thiazide diuretics should also be screened for prediabetes and diabetes.
Individuals taking some HIV medications should also be screened for prediabetes and diabetes.
Patients with impaired glucose regulation (prediabetes) should receive counseling addressing their risk of developing diabetes.
Patients with impaired glucose regulation (prediabetes) should receive counseling addressing the importance of lifestyle changes for preventing or delaying the onset of type 2 diabetes.
Patients with impaired glucose regulation (prediabetes) should be monitored closely for development of diabetes symptoms.
Patients with impaired glucose regulation (prediabetes) should be monitored closely for elevated plasma glucose via hemoglobin A1c every 6 months.
Patients with impaired glucose regulation (prediabetes) should be monitored closely for elevated plasma glucose via annual oral glucose tolerance testing.
Type 2 diabetes can usually be prevented with lifestyle modification.
Weight loss of as little as 7% of baseline body weight, combined with moderate-intensity physical activity, such as brisk walking, for at least 150 minutes/week, may reduce the incidence of Type 2 diabetes in high-risk people by more than 50%.
Metformin, glucagon-like peptide receptor agonists, acarbose, thiazolidinediones, valsartan, testosterone, orlistat, and phentermine/topiramate have been shown to prevent or slow progression of prediabetes to Type 2 diabetes.
Metformin is safe and cost-effective and has the most established evidence for the prevention of Type 2 diabetes.
Metformin can be considered if diet and lifestyle are not successful, especially in patients with a body mass index of 35 or higher or a history of gestational diabetes who are at highest risk for developing Type 2 diabetes.
Pharmacotherapy for weight loss, medical devices, or weight loss surgery can be used as adjuncts to diet and physical activity in patients with obesity.
Metabolic surgery, also known as bariatric surgery, has been shown to decrease the risk of progression to Type 2 diabetes in patients with obesity.
The American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee published standards of care in diabetes, including screening and prevention guidelines, in the 2025 issue of Diabetes Care.
The American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee published the Standards of Care in Diabetes-2025 in Diabetes Care.
The Standards of Care in Diabetes-2025, published by the American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee, includes the Prevention or Delay of Diabetes and Associated Comorbidities.
Wang W, Wei R, Huang Z, Luo J, Pan Q, and Guo L conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis on the effects of treatment with Glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist on prediabetes with overweight/obesity.
The systematic review and meta-analysis by Wang W, Wei R, Huang Z, Luo J, Pan Q, and Guo L was published in Diabetes Metab Res Rev in 2023.
Hostalek U, Gwilt M, and Hildemann S discussed the therapeutic use of Metformin in prediabetes and diabetes prevention in the journal Drugs.
The American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee published Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations: Standards of Care in Diabetes-2025 in Diabetes Care.
Mechanick JI, Apovian C, Brethauer, and colleagues published the Clinical Practice Guidelines for the Perioperative Nutrition, Metabolic, and Nonsurgical Support of Patients Undergoing Bariatric Procedures in Obesity.
The Clinical Practice Guidelines for the Perioperative Nutrition, Metabolic, and Nonsurgical Support of Patients Undergoing Bariatric Procedures were cosponsored by the American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists, American College of Endocrinology, The Obesity Society, American Society for Metabolic and Bariatric Surgery, Obesity Medicine Association, and American Society of Anesthesiologists.
Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus is often asymptomatic in its early stages, with mild hyperglycemia that may not produce noticeable symptoms.
Diagnosis of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus may be delayed for many years if routine screening for Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus is not performed.
The most common symptoms of Diabetes Mellitus are those of hyperglycemia, which is a characteristic of Diabetes Mellitus.
More significant hyperglycemia associated with Diabetes Mellitus causes glycosuria and thus an osmotic diuresis, leading to urinary frequency, polyuria, and polydipsia that may progress to orthostatic hypotension and dehydration in patients with Diabetes Mellitus.
Severe dehydration caused by hyperglycemia associated with Diabetes Mellitus causes weakness, fatigue, and mental status changes in patients with Diabetes Mellitus.
Symptoms of hyperglycemia associated with Diabetes Mellitus may come and go as plasma glucose levels fluctuate in patients with Diabetes Mellitus.
Polyphagia may accompany symptoms of hyperglycemia associated with Diabetes Mellitus, but polyphagia is not typically a primary concern for patients with Diabetes Mellitus.
Hyperglycemia associated with Diabetes Mellitus can also cause weight loss, nausea and vomiting, and blurred vision, and it may predispose patients with Diabetes Mellitus to bacterial or fungal infections.
Acanthosis nigricans is a skin condition characterized by skin thickening and pigmentation, most typically developing in the axillae and nape of the neck in patients with Insulin Resistance.
Initial symptoms in some patients with Diabetes Mellitus are those of long-term diabetic complications, suggesting that Diabetes Mellitus has been present for some time in these patients.
In some patients with Diabetes Mellitus, hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state occurs initially, especially during a period of stress or when glucose metabolism is further impaired by medications, such as glucocorticoids, in patients with Diabetes Mellitus.
Individuals with type 2 diabetes frequently have overweight or obesity, as well as findings of insulin resistance, such as acanthosis nigricans and skin tags, in addition to symptoms of hyperglycemia.
Type 2 diabetes is diagnosed based on an abnormal fasting plasma glucose, glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1C), oral glucose tolerance test, or random glucose in the presence of certain symptoms of diabetes mellitus.
Diabetes mellitus is diagnosed based on an abnormal fasting plasma glucose, glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1C), oral glucose tolerance test, or random glucose in the presence of certain symptoms of diabetes mellitus.
The diagnosis of type 2 diabetes mellitus is made based on evidence of insulin resistance and relative inadequacy of insulin secretion, without evidence of autoimmune causes of type 2 diabetes mellitus.
The age and manner of presentation of type 2 diabetes mellitus may also suggest the classification of the patient's type 2 diabetes mellitus, typically with older age at presentation than in type 1 diabetes mellitus and with associated obesity.
Type 2 diabetes mellitus can develop in children, so age alone is not a reliable differentiator between type 1 diabetes mellitus and type 2 diabetes mellitus.
The diagnosis of diabetes mellitus is made based on diagnostic criteria for diabetes mellitus and prediabetes, as outlined in the table Diagnostic Criteria for Diabetes Mellitus and Prediabetes.
The general characteristics of type 2 diabetes mellitus are outlined in the table General Characteristics of Types 1 and 2 Diabetes Mellitus, which provides more details on the differentiation between type 1 diabetes mellitus and type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Prediabetes is diagnosed when measures of glucose are between the normal range and the range diagnostic for diabetes.
Prediabetes is sometimes considered a precursor or transitional state prior to the development of type 2 diabetes.
Prediabetes is a significant risk factor for diabetes and may be present for many years before the onset of diabetes.
Prediabetes is associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular disease, mortality, and microvascular complications of diabetes, including retinopathy in approximately 8% of patients with prediabetes.
Prediabetes is associated with an increased risk of peripheral neuropathy in 7 to 16% of patients with prediabetes.
Prediabetes is associated with an increased risk of chronic kidney disease in approximately 10% of patients with prediabetes.
The American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee provides diagnosis references for prediabetes.
The American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee published the Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes: Standards of Care in Diabetes-2025 in Diabetes Care in 2025.
Echouffo-Tcheugui and colleagues published a review on the diagnosis and management of prediabetes in JAMA in 2023.
Treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus often includes education on diet and exercise.
Treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus often includes weight loss.
Treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus often includes oral antihyperglycemics, such as metformin and sodium glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors.
Treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus often includes non-insulin injectable medications, such as glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists and dual glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide and glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists.
Treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus sometimes includes insulin.
To prevent complications in patients with type 2 diabetes, renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system blockers, such as angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors or angiotensin II receptor blockers, aspirin, and/or statins are often used.
Patient education is a key element of treatment for all patients with type 2 diabetes.
Diet is a key element of treatment for all patients with type 2 diabetes.
Exercise is a key element of treatment for all patients with type 2 diabetes.
Weight loss is a key element of treatment for all patients with type 2 diabetes.
Monitoring of glucose control is a key element of treatment for all patients with type 2 diabetes.
Some patients with type 2 diabetes may be able to avoid or cease treatment with medications if they are able to maintain plasma glucose levels with diet and exercise alone.
Formal diabetes education, generally conducted by diabetes nurses and nutrition specialists, is often very effective for patients with type 2 diabetes.
Formal diabetes education has been shown to improve diabetes outcomes for patients with type 2 diabetes.
Diabetes education is considered as important as pharmacologic therapy in managing type 2 diabetes.
Diabetes education should include information about the causes of type 2 diabetes.
Diabetes education should include information about diet for patients with type 2 diabetes.
Diabetes education should include information about exercise for patients with type 2 diabetes.
Diabetes education should include information about medication use, including insulin when appropriate, for patients with type 2 diabetes.
Diabetes education should include information about self-monitoring with fingerstick testing or continuous glucose monitoring for patients with type 2 diabetes.
Diabetes education should include information about monitoring HbA1C for patients with type 2 diabetes.
Diabetes education should include information about symptoms and signs of hypoglycemia, hyperglycemia, and diabetic complications for patients with type 2 diabetes.
Diabetes education should be reinforced at every physician visit for patients with type 2 diabetes.
Diabetes education should be reinforced at every hospitalization for patients with type 2 diabetes.
Individualized medical nutrition therapy with a dietitian should complement physician counseling and diabetes education for patients with type 2 diabetes.
The patient with type 2 diabetes and any person who prepares the patient's meals should be present during individualized medical nutrition therapy with a dietitian.
Patients with diabetes should be educated on consuming a diet rich in whole foods rather than processed foods to manage their condition.
Carbohydrates in the diet of patients with diabetes should be high quality and should contain adequate amounts of fiber, vitamins, and minerals.
The diet of patients with diabetes should be low in added sugar, fat, and sodium to help control glucose levels.
There are no specific recommendations on the percentages of calories that should come from carbohydrate, protein, or fat in the diet of patients with diabetes.
Adjusting the diet of patients with diabetes to their individual circumstances can help them control fluctuations in their glucose level.
Dietary management of patients with diabetes should be individualized based on the patient's age, size, activity level, tastes, preferences, culture, and goals.
The dietary management plan of patients with diabetes should be formulated to accommodate requirements posed by their comorbid conditions.
Patients with diabetes should be educated about using carbohydrate consumption to guide bolus insulin dosing when appropriate for their individual circumstances.
The concept of the glycemic index is a measure of the impact of an ingested carbohydrate-containing food on the blood glucose level of patients with diabetes.
The glycemic index may be useful in general dietary management of patients with diabetes as well as in guiding their food choices.
Physical activity should increase incrementally to whatever level a patient with type 2 diabetes can tolerate.
Aerobic exercise has been shown to improve glycemic control in patients with type 2 diabetes.
Resistance exercise has been shown to improve glycemic control in patients with type 2 diabetes.
A combination of resistance and aerobic exercise has been shown to be superior to either alone in improving glycemic control in patients with type 2 diabetes.
Adults with type 2 diabetes and without physical limitations should exercise for a minimum of 150 minutes per week.
Adults with type 2 diabetes and without physical limitations should divide their exercise over at least 3 days per week.
Exercise has a variable short-term effect on blood glucose levels in patients with type 2 diabetes, depending on the timing of exercise in relation to meals.
Exercise has a variable short-term effect on blood glucose levels in patients with type 2 diabetes, depending on the duration of exercise.
Exercise has a variable short-term effect on blood glucose levels in patients with type 2 diabetes, depending on the intensity of exercise.
Exercise has a variable short-term effect on blood glucose levels in patients with type 2 diabetes, depending on the type of exercise.
Patients with known or suspected cardiovascular disease may benefit from a pre-exercise evaluation before beginning an exercise program for type 2 diabetes management.
Patients with known or suspected cardiovascular disease may undergo exercise stress testing as part of a pre-exercise evaluation before beginning an exercise program for type 2 diabetes management.
Activity goals for patients with type 2 diabetes may require modification for patients with complications of diabetes such as neuropathy.
Activity goals for patients with type 2 diabetes may require modification for patients with complications of diabetes such as retinopathy.
Physicians should prescribe antihyperglycemic medications that promote weight loss, such as GLP-1 receptor agonists, SGLT-2 inhibitors, or a dual GIP/GLP-1 receptor agonist, to people with diabetes and obesity.
Physicians should prescribe antihyperglycemic medications that are weight-neutral, such as dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors or metformin, to people with diabetes and obesity if possible.
Specific GLP-1 receptor agonists, such as semaglutide and liraglutide, are associated with significant weight loss even at doses used for diabetes treatment.
A dual GIP/GLP-1 receptor agonist, such as tirzepatide, is associated with significant weight loss even at doses used for diabetes treatment.
Orlistat, an intestinal lipase inhibitor, reduces dietary fat absorption in patients with obesity.
Orlistat reduces serum lipids and helps promote weight loss in patients with obesity.
Phentermine/topiramate, a combination medication, reduces appetite through multiple mechanisms in the brain in patients with obesity.
Naltrexone/bupropion, a combination medication, may be useful in selected patients with obesity as part of a comprehensive weight loss program.
Orlistat, phentermine/topiramate, and naltrexone/bupropion have less weight loss efficacy than GLP-1 receptor agonists or tirzepatide in patients with obesity.
GLP-1 receptor agonists, such as semaglutide and liraglutide, have more weight loss efficacy than orlistat, phentermine/topiramate, and naltrexone/bupropion in patients with obesity.
Tirzepatide, a dual GIP/GLP-1 receptor agonist, has more weight loss efficacy than orlistat, phentermine/topiramate, and naltrexone/bupropion in patients with obesity.
An oral hydrogel containing cellulose and citric acid can induce modest weight loss in patients with prediabetes.
An oral hydrogel containing cellulose and citric acid can induce modest weight loss in patients with diabetes.
The oral hydrogel containing cellulose and citric acid causes patients to feel full and eat less, resulting in weight loss in patients with prediabetes and diabetes.
Medical weight-loss devices, including implanted gastric balloons, a vagus nerve stimulator, and gastric aspiration therapy, are also available for patients, but the use of medical weight-loss devices remains limited for patients.
Metabolic surgery, such as sleeve gastrectomy or gastric bypass, leads to weight loss in patients with diabetes mellitus and improvement in glucose control in patients with diabetes mellitus, independent of weight loss in patients with diabetes mellitus.
Metabolic surgery decreases cardiovascular risk in patients with diabetes mellitus who undergo metabolic surgery.
Metabolic surgery should be recommended for appropriately selected patients with diabetes mellitus who have a body mass index ≥ 30 kg/m2.
Consideration of metabolic surgery is specifically recommended for patients with diabetes mellitus and a body mass index ≥ 30 kg/m2.
Rapid weight loss induced by GLP-1 receptor agonist pharmacotherapy leads to malnutrition in patients who receive GLP-1 receptor agonist pharmacotherapy.
Rapid weight loss induced by bariatric surgery leads to malnutrition in patients who undergo bariatric surgery.
Rapid weight loss induced by GLP-1 receptor agonist pharmacotherapy or bariatric surgery can lead to sarcopenia in patients who receive GLP-1 receptor agonist pharmacotherapy or undergo bariatric surgery.
A diet with sufficient protein should be encouraged for patients who undergo rapid weight loss.
Resistance exercise should be encouraged for patients who undergo rapid weight loss.
Patients who undergo rapid weight loss should be tested for micronutrient deficiencies.
Treatment goals in type 2 diabetes include glycemic control for patients with type 2 diabetes.
Treatment goals in type 2 diabetes include weight management for patients with type 2 diabetes.
Treatment goals in type 2 diabetes include risk reduction in patients with type 2 diabetes and comorbidities such as atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease.
Treatment goals in type 2 diabetes include risk reduction in patients with type 2 diabetes and comorbidities such as heart failure.
Treatment goals in type 2 diabetes include risk reduction in patients with type 2 diabetes and comorbidities such as chronic kidney disease.
Treatment goals in type 2 diabetes include risk reduction in patients with type 2 diabetes and comorbidities such as metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis.
Patients with type 2 diabetes and mildly elevated plasma glucose, with HbA1C approximately 7.5%, may be prescribed a trial of diet and exercise.
For patients with type 2 diabetes with an inadequate response to a trial of diet and exercise, or in those patients with type 2 diabetes with more significant hyperglycemia, pharmacologic therapy is necessary.
In patients with type 2 diabetes without atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, heart failure, or chronic kidney disease, selection of therapy involves consideration of adverse effects, convenience, cost, and patient preference.
Metformin is usually the first oral medication used for patients with type 2 diabetes due to its cost-effectiveness and safety profile.
GLP-1 or dual GIP/GLP-1 receptor agonists are an effective second-line therapy for patients with type 2 diabetes after metformin and may be more effective than insulin for patients with type 2 diabetes.
GLP-1 or dual GIP/GLP-1 receptor agonists may also be used as an add-on to insulin for patients with type 2 diabetes.
Patients with type 2 diabetes and obesity can also benefit from the weight-lowering effects of GLP-1 receptor agonist therapy.
Patients with type 2 diabetes and obesity can also benefit from the use of tirzepatide, a dual GIP/GLP-1 receptor agonist.
In patients with type 2 diabetes with more significant glucose elevations at diagnosis or with HbA1C levels 1.5 to 2.0% above target, early combination therapy should be initiated.
Early combination therapy for patients with type 2 diabetes may include metformin plus a dipeptyl-peptidase-4 inhibitor, a GLP-1 or dual GIP/GLP-1 receptor agonist, or a SGLT2 inhibitor.
Early combination therapy for patients with type 2 diabetes may also include insulin therapy.
There is evidence that early combination medication therapy with vildagliptin and metformin leads to superior and more durable blood glucose control than a stepwise approach to adding diabetes pharmacotherapy for patients with type 2 diabetes.
In patients with known Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Disease or at moderate or high risk for Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Disease, a Sodium-Glucose Cotransporter 2 inhibitor or a Glucagon-Like Peptide-1 receptor agonist is recommended.
A Sodium-Glucose Cotransporter 2 inhibitor or a Glucagon-Like Peptide-1 receptor agonist is recommended for patients with known Chronic Kidney Disease because these medication classes decrease major adverse cardiovascular events, such as myocardial infarction, and mortality.
Poor glycemic control is a specific cardiovascular risk factor used to determine the recommendation for a Sodium-Glucose Cotransporter 2 inhibitor or a Glucagon-Like Peptide-1 receptor agonist.
Hypertension is a specific cardiovascular risk factor used to determine the recommendation for a Sodium-Glucose Cotransporter 2 inhibitor or a Glucagon-Like Peptide-1 receptor agonist.
Dyslipidemia is a specific cardiovascular risk factor used to determine the recommendation for a Sodium-Glucose Cotransporter 2 inhibitor or a Glucagon-Like Peptide-1 receptor agonist.
Smoking or tobacco use is a specific cardiovascular risk factor used to determine the recommendation for a Sodium-Glucose Cotransporter 2 inhibitor or a Glucagon-Like Peptide-1 receptor agonist.
Harmful alcohol use is a specific cardiovascular risk factor used to determine the recommendation for a Sodium-Glucose Cotransporter 2 inhibitor or a Glucagon-Like Peptide-1 receptor agonist.
Family history of Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Disease or Chronic Kidney Disease is a specific cardiovascular risk factor used to determine the recommendation for a Sodium-Glucose Cotransporter 2 inhibitor or a Glucagon-Like Peptide-1 receptor agonist.
Obesity is a specific cardiovascular risk factor used to determine the recommendation for a Sodium-Glucose Cotransporter 2 inhibitor or a Glucagon-Like Peptide-1 receptor agonist.
A statin is recommended for all adults with type 2 diabetes who are 40 to 75 years old.
A statin is recommended for patients with type 2 diabetes who are 20 to 39 years old and have additional risk factors for Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Disease.
A statin is recommended for patients with type 2 diabetes and Chronic Kidney Disease, regardless of age.
The intensity of statin therapy for patients with type 2 diabetes depends upon specific risk factors for Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Disease.
The risk of teratogenicity should be considered in all individuals with type 2 diabetes of childbearing potential.
Aspirin is recommended for patients with diabetes and known Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Disease.
Patients with type 2 diabetes and heart failure with either reduced or preserved ejection fraction should be treated with a Sodium-Glucose Cotransporter 2 inhibitor.
Patients with type 2 diabetes and symptomatic heart failure with preserved ejection fraction and obesity may also receive a Glucagon-Like Peptide-1 receptor agonist.
Patients with Chronic Kidney Disease or heart failure without contraindications are recommended to take SGLT2-inhibitors because SGLT2-inhibitors have been shown to decrease Chronic Kidney Disease progression and mortality.
An Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme inhibitor or Angiotensin Receptor Blocker is recommended for patients with diabetes and Chronic Kidney Disease, evidenced by albuminuria and/or decreased glomerular filtration rate.
An Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme inhibitor or Angiotensin Receptor Blocker is first-line therapy for patients with diabetes and hypertension regardless of Chronic Kidney Disease status.
A nonsteroidal mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist, such as finerenone, is recommended in individuals with Chronic Kidney Disease, particularly those with persistent albuminuria despite maximal Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme inhibitor or Angiotensin Receptor Blocker therapy.
Glucagon-like peptide-1 or dual Glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide/Glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists and pioglitazone are recommended for patients with metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease or metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis.
Insulin should generally be considered in patients with evidence of ongoing catabolism, such as unintentional weight loss, or symptoms of hyperglycemia, such as polyuria or polydipsia, with Hemoglobin A1C levels greater than 10% and blood glucose levels greater than or equal to 300 mg/dL.
Insulin is indicated as initial therapy for patients with type 2 diabetes who are pregnant.
Insulin is indicated as initial therapy for patients who present with acute metabolic decompensation, such as hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state or diabetic ketoacidosis.
Patients with severe hyperglycemia may respond better to therapy after glucose levels are normalized with insulin treatment.
Insulin can be administered as basal insulin, which is long- or intermediate-acting insulin, depending on patient needs.
Insulin can be administered as bolus insulin with meals, which is rapid acting insulin, depending on patient needs.
Insulin can be administered as a combination of basal and bolus insulin, depending on patient needs.
Insulin can be administered as twice daily premixed intermediate- and short- or rapid-acting insulin, depending on patient needs.
Adults with diabetes, including type 2 diabetes, should undergo a comprehensive foot examination at least annually.
Individuals with peripheral neuropathy should have a comprehensive foot examination at every visit.
Individuals with a history of ulcers should have a comprehensive foot examination at every visit.
Individuals with a history of amputations should have a comprehensive foot examination at every visit.
Individuals with poorly controlled glucose should have a comprehensive foot examination at every visit.
Certain guidelines recommend that all patients with diabetes should have a comprehensive foot examination at every visit.
Assessment of neuropathy in patients with diabetes includes a 10 g monofilament test.
Assessment of neuropathy in patients with diabetes includes pinprick testing.
Assessment of neuropathy in patients with diabetes includes temperature testing.
Assessment of neuropathy in patients with diabetes includes vibration testing.
Patients with diabetes and sensory loss require regular professional podiatric care.
Patients with diabetes and circulatory impairment require regular professional podiatric care.
Toenails of patients with diabetes should be cut straight across.
Toenails of patients with diabetes should not be cut too close to the skin.
Toenails of patients with diabetes should be cut by a podiatrist, if possible.
Patients with diabetes should have their calluses trimmed by a podiatrist as part of regular professional podiatric care.
Patients with sensory loss or circulatory impairment should be advised to inspect their feet daily for cracks, fissures, calluses, corns, and ulcers.
Patients with sensory loss or circulatory impairment should wash their feet daily in lukewarm water, using mild soap, and dry them gently and thoroughly.
A lubricant, such as lanolin, should be applied to dry, scaly skin of patients with sensory loss or circulatory impairment.
Nonmedicated foot powders should be applied to the moist feet of patients with sensory loss or circulatory impairment.
Patients with sensory loss or circulatory impairment should not use adhesive plasters and tape, harsh chemicals, corn cures, water bottles, and electric pads on their skin.
Patients with sensory loss or circulatory impairment should change their socks or stockings daily.
Patients with sensory loss or circulatory impairment should not wear constricting clothing, such as garters, socks, or stockings with tight elastic tops.
Shoes of patients with sensory loss or circulatory impairment should fit well, be wide-toed without open heels or toes, and be changed frequently.
Special shoes should be prescribed to patients with sensory loss or circulatory impairment to reduce trauma if their foot is deformed, such as in the case of previous toe amputation, hammer toe, or bunion.
Patients with sensory loss or circulatory impairment should avoid walking barefoot.
Patients with neuropathic foot ulcers should avoid weight bearing until neuropathic foot ulcers heal.
Patients with neuropathic foot ulcers who cannot avoid weight bearing should wear appropriate orthotic protection.
Debridement and antibiotics may result in good healing of neuropathic foot ulcers and may prevent major surgery for neuropathic foot ulcers.
After neuropathic foot ulcers have healed, patients with neuropathic foot ulcers should be prescribed appropriate inserts or special shoes.
In refractory cases of neuropathic foot ulcers, especially if osteomyelitis is present, surgical removal of the metatarsal head may be required to treat neuropathic foot ulcers.
In refractory cases of neuropathic foot ulcers, especially if osteomyelitis is present, amputation of the involved toe may be required to treat neuropathic foot ulcers.
In refractory cases of neuropathic foot ulcers, especially if osteomyelitis is present, transmetatarsal amputation may be required to treat neuropathic foot ulcers.
A neuropathic joint can often be satisfactorily managed with orthopedic devices, such as short leg braces, molded shoes, sponge-rubber arch supports, crutches, and prostheses.
All patients with diabetes should be vaccinated against Streptococcus pneumoniae as per standard recommendations.
All patients with diabetes should be vaccinated against influenza virus as per standard recommendations.
All patients with diabetes should be vaccinated against hepatitis B as per standard recommendations.
All patients with diabetes should be vaccinated against varicella as per standard recommendations.
All patients with diabetes should be vaccinated against respiratory syncytial virus as per standard recommendations.
All patients with diabetes should be vaccinated against SARS-CoV-2 as per standard recommendations.
HbA1C levels in patients with Type 2 Diabetes reflect glucose control over the preceding 3 months and hence assess control between physician visits for patients with Type 2 Diabetes.
HbA1C levels in patients with Type 2 Diabetes should be assessed at least twice a year when plasma glucose in patients with Type 2 Diabetes appears stable.
HbA1C levels in patients with Type 2 Diabetes should be assessed more frequently when control of glucose levels in patients with Type 2 Diabetes is uncertain.
The goal HbA1C level for most patients with Type 2 Diabetes is less than 7%.
The goal HbA1C level for patients with Type 2 Diabetes should be individualized based on the specific needs of each patient with Type 2 Diabetes.
For older adults with Type 2 Diabetes, a target HbA1C level of less than 7.5 to 8.5% may be appropriate due to their high risk of hypoglycemia and limited life expectancy.
For patients with Type 2 Diabetes who have a high risk of hypoglycemia, a target HbA1C level of less than 7.5 to 8.5% may be appropriate.
For patients with Type 2 Diabetes who have limited life expectancy, a target HbA1C level of less than 7.5 to 8.5% may be appropriate.
Home HbA1c testing kits are available for patients with Type 2 Diabetes but are used infrequently by patients with Type 2 Diabetes.
The frequency of home blood glucose monitoring for patients with Type 2 Diabetes should be tailored to the individual patient with Type 2 Diabetes depending upon their risk of hypoglycemia.
The frequency of home blood glucose monitoring for patients with Type 2 Diabetes should be tailored to the individual patient with Type 2 Diabetes depending upon their use of insulin.
The frequency of home blood glucose monitoring for patients with Type 2 Diabetes should be tailored to the individual patient with Type 2 Diabetes depending upon their overall glycemic control as measured by HbA1c level.
Patients with Type 2 Diabetes who are treated with insulin should monitor their glucose levels at least once daily.
Patients with Type 2 Diabetes who are taking multiple daily injections of insulin should use continuous glucose monitoring when possible.
Patients with Type 2 Diabetes who are taking multiple daily injections of insulin should check their fingerstick glucose multiple times per day if continuous glucose monitoring is not possible.
Continuous glucose monitoring can help support behavioral modification to understand the impact of dietary choices on glucose levels in patients with Type 2 Diabetes.
Continuous glucose monitoring can help support behavioral modification to understand the impact of exercise on glucose levels in patients with Type 2 Diabetes.
Even for patients with Type 2 Diabetes whose Type 2 Diabetes is relatively well-controlled without insulin, continuous glucose monitoring can help support behavioral modification.
The American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee published guidelines on glycemic goals and hypoglycemia in Diabetes Care in 2025.
Kalyani RR, Neumiller JJ, Maruthur NM, and Wexler DJ published a review on the diagnosis and treatment of type 2 diabetes in adults in JAMA in 2025.
Patients with type 2 diabetes are at risk for vascular, neurologic, and immunologic complications of diabetes.
Metabolic-dysfunction associated liver disease is a complication that is more specific to type 2 diabetes.
Screening recommendations exist for both general and specific complications of type 2 diabetes.
Hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state and hypoglycemia are acute complications of type 1 diabetes and its treatment.
Chronic hyperglycemia leads to microvascular complications, including retinopathy, nephropathy, and neuropathy, in patients with diabetes.
Neuropathy is a heterogeneous long-term complication of diabetes with multifactorial pathogenesis, including toxic effects of hyperglycemia and advanced glycation end-products on nerves.
Ischemia to nerves from microvascular disease is a factor in the pathogenesis of neuropathy in patients with diabetes.
Chronic hyperglycemia also leads to macrovascular complications in patients with diabetes.
The Long-Term Complications of Diabetes Mellitus section provides a more detailed discussion of specific complications of diabetes.
Macrovascular complications of type 2 diabetes include atherosclerosis of large vessels leading to angina pectoris and myocardial infarction, transient ischemic attacks and strokes, and peripheral artery disease.
Immune dysfunction is another major long-term complication of type 2 diabetes.
Risk of complications of type 2 diabetes can be decreased by strict glycemic control and by management of hypertension and lipid levels in patients with type 2 diabetes.
Specific measures for prevention of progression of complications of type 2 diabetes once detected are described under Long-Term Complications of type 2 diabetes.
The majority, but not all, adults with type 2 diabetes also have metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD), placing them at risk for the development of metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis (MASH) and cirrhosis.
Adults with type 2 diabetes should undergo dilated and comprehensive eye examination for retinopathy at diagnosis, and then every 1 to 2 years.
Adults with type 2 diabetes should undergo foot examination with pulses, reflexes, temperature or pinprick sensation, vibration, and monofilament testing for neuropathy and foot ulcers at diagnosis, then annually.
Adults with type 2 diabetes should undergo spot urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio and estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) for nephropathy at diagnosis, then annually.
Adults with type 2 diabetes should undergo blood pressure measurement for hypertension at every visit.
Atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease requires a lipid profile soon after diagnosis of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, then annually.
Atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease requires additional screening that depends on signs of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, symptoms of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, and additional risk factors for atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease.
Heart failure is a condition for which measuring a natriuretic peptide should be considered.
Peripheral artery disease is a condition for which the ankle-brachial index should be considered if the patient with peripheral artery disease is ≥ 65 years old and has any other microvascular disease, foot complications, or end-organ damage.
MASH and cirrhosis require calculation of the fibrosis-4 (FIB-4) index using alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), and platelet count for patients with MASH and cirrhosis.
Additional cardiovascular screening for patients with cardiovascular disease may include risk stratification for cardiovascular disease.
Additional cardiovascular screening for patients with cardiovascular disease may include electrocardiography for cardiovascular disease.
Additional cardiovascular screening for patients with cardiovascular disease may include other testing for cardiovascular disease.
