The American Association of Clinical Endocrinology published the first iteration of the American Association of Clinical Endocrinology algorithm for glycemic control in 2009.
The American Association of Clinical Endocrinology algorithm for glycemic control was expanded on the visual guidance provided by the American College of Endocrinology/American Association of Clinical Endocrinology Diabetes Road Maps.
At the time of the first iteration of the American Association of Clinical Endocrinology algorithm for glycemic control, thiazolidinediones, alpha-glucosidase inhibitors, metformin, and sulfonylureas/glinides were in use.
The first iteration of the American Association of Clinical Endocrinology algorithm for glycemic control also included the addition of exenatide and dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors.
The American Association of Clinical Endocrinology published the Comprehensive Type 2 Diabetes Management Algorithm in 2013, which incorporated new sections on the management of overweight/obesity, dyslipidemia, and hypertension.
The Comprehensive Type 2 Diabetes Management Algorithm was revised on a yearly basis through 2020.
The American Association of Clinical Endocrinology task force is grateful for the contributions and framework provided by previous authors of the American Association of Clinical Endocrinology algorithm.
The American Association of Clinical Endocrinology published the Clinical Practice Guideline: Developing a Diabetes Mellitus Comprehensive Care Plan — 2022 Update, which provided 170 revised or new graded recommendations accompanied by detailed, evidence-based rationales.
The 2023 American Association of Clinical Endocrinology algorithm update builds on previous versions of the American Association of Clinical Endocrinology algorithm but with the incorporation of new management approaches that align with the 2022 American Association of Clinical Endocrinology clinical practice guideline on diabetes mellitus.
The 2023 American Association of Clinical Endocrinology algorithm is intended as a more concise document than the 2022 American Association of Clinical Endocrinology clinical practice guideline, providing easily accessible, visual guidance for decision-making in the clinic setting.
The 2023 American Association of Clinical Endocrinology algorithm summary is not intended to iterate all of the evidence base behind the algorithmic pathways, as this is detailed in the 2022 American Association of Clinical Endocrinology Diabetes Mellitus Comprehensive Care Plan update.
The objective of the 2023 American Association of Clinical Endocrinology algorithm summary is to provide a written guide or “roadmap” through the graphic depictions of the algorithm contents.
The process for updating the 2023 American Association of Clinical Endocrinology algorithm involved multiple meetings of American Association of Clinical Endocrinology task force members/authors between January 2022 and November 2022.
Smaller groups of American Association of Clinical Endocrinology task force members/authors focused on specific algorithm subsections, which were then brought to the complete American Association of Clinical Endocrinology task force for discussion and peer review.
A proportion of American Association of Clinical Endocrinology algorithm task force members overlapped with the American Association of Clinical Endocrinology diabetes clinical practice guideline task force to ensure continuity and alignment with the 2022 published guideline recommendations.
The 2023 American Association of Clinical Endocrinology algorithm continues to emphasize lifestyle modification and treatment of overweight/obesity as key pillars of the management of prediabetes and diabetes mellitus.
The 2023 American Association of Clinical Endocrinology algorithm highlights the importance of appropriate management of the atherosclerotic risk factors of dyslipidemia and hypertension.
The 2023 American Association of Clinical Endocrinology algorithm includes a complication-centric approach, beyond glucose levels, to frame decisions regarding first-line pharmacologic choices for the treatment of persons with diabetes mellitus.
The American Association of Clinical Endocrinology task force members/authors acknowledge that health care disparities and lack of access to newer medications remain a significant barrier for some persons with diabetes mellitus.
The 2023 American Association of Clinical Endocrinology algorithm is divided into discrete graphic sections that outline the principles for management of Type 2 Diabetes.
The 2023 American Association of Clinical Endocrinology algorithm guides management of adiposity-based chronic disease, prediabetes, and atherosclerotic risk factors of dyslipidemia and hypertension.
The 2023 American Association of Clinical Endocrinology algorithm includes direction for insulin initiation and titration.
The 2023 American Association of Clinical Endocrinology algorithm provides convenient tables summarizing the benefits and risks of antihyperglycemic medications and weight-loss pharmacotherapy.
A new table of immunization guidance is provided in the 2023 American Association of Clinical Endocrinology algorithm, summarizing recommendations from the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Excess weight results in insulin resistance and increases the risk for prediabetes and Type 2 Diabetes.
Excess weight leads to multiple complications beyond dysglycemia that comprise adiposity-based chronic disease and lead to excess morbidity and mortality.
Lifestyle intervention to achieve weight loss is a key pillar of the comprehensive treatment of persons with prediabetes to decrease progression to Type 2 Diabetes.
Weight loss improves many of the cardiometabolic and biomechanical components of adiposity-based chronic disease, including increased glycemia, dyslipidemia, elevated blood pressure, cardiovascular disease, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, sleep apnea, and osteoarthritis.
The American Association of Endocrinology Comprehensive Type 2 Diabetes Management Algorithm is based on principles that underlie all therapy for Type 2 Diabetes.
Lifestyle modification for Type 2 Diabetes includes exercise, healthy dietary changes, smoking cessation, and reduced alcohol intake.
Lifestyle modification for Type 2 Diabetes also includes assessment and management of sleep disorders and depression.
The Complications-Centric Model for the Care of Persons with Overweight/Obesity provides guidance on proposed interventions to improve the overall health of persons with overweight/obesity in the context of Type 2 Diabetes.
The choice of antihyperglycemic therapy for Type 2 Diabetes reflects glycemic targets, atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, congestive heart failure, chronic kidney disease, overweight/obesity, and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease.
Glycemic control has an essential role in the prevention and decreased progression of Type 2 Diabetes complications.
The 2022 American Association of Endocrinology Clinical Practice Guidelines update recommends that clinicians prescribe a glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist or a sodium glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitor for Type 2 Diabetes patients with established or high risk for atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, heart failure, and/or chronic kidney disease.
The choice of antihyperglycemic therapy for Type 2 Diabetes includes consideration of the potential benefit for stroke or nonalcoholic fatty liver disease.
The choice of therapy for Type 2 Diabetes includes ease of use and access to antihyperglycemic agents.