The AACE Consensus Statement has an update to the article included at the end of the article.
The update to the article is located at the end of the AACE Consensus Statement article.
Susan L. Samson, MD, PhD, FRCPC, FACE is the Chair of the Task Force for the American Association of Clinical Endocrinology Consensus Statement.
Susan L. Samson, MD, PhD, FRCPC, FACE is also the Chair of the Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, at the Mayo Clinic in Jacksonville, Florida.
Priyathama Vellanki, MD is the Vice Chair of the Task Force for the American Association of Clinical Endocrinology Consensus Statement.
Priyathama Vellanki, MD is an Associate Professor of Medicine at the Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Lipids, Emory University School of Medicine, Emory University.
Priyathama Vellanki, MD is the Section Chief of Endocrinology at Grady Memorial Hospital in Atlanta, Georgia.
Lawrence Blonde, MD, FACP, MACE is the Director of the Ochsner Diabetes Clinical Research Unit, Frank Riddick Diabetes Institute, Department of Endocrinology, Ochsner Health, in New Orleans, Louisiana.
Elena A. Christofides, MD, FACE is an endocrinologist at Endocrinology Associates, Inc., in Columbus, Ohio.
Rodolfo J. Galindo, MD, FACE is an Associate Professor of Medicine at the University of Miami Miller School of Medicine.
Rodolfo J. Galindo, MD, FACE is the Director of the Comprehensive Diabetes Center at Lennar Medical Center, UMiami Health System, in Miami, Florida.
Rodolfo J. Galindo, MD, FACE is the Director of Diabetes Management at Jackson Memorial Health System in Miami, Florida.
Irl B. Hirsch, MD is a Professor of Medicine at the Department of Medicine, University of Washington School of Medicine, in Seattle, Washington.
Scott D. Isaacs, MD, FACP, FACE is a member of the Department of Medicine at Emory University School of Medicine in Atlanta, Georgia.
Kenneth E. Izuora, MD, MBA, FACE is a Professor at the Department of Internal Medicine, Endocrinology, Kirk Kerkorian School of Medicine, University of Nevada Las Vegas, in Las Vegas, Nevada.
Cecilia C. Low Wang, MD, FACP is a Professor of Medicine at the Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Diabetes, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, in Aurora, Colorado.
Christine L. Twining, MD, FACE is an endocrinologist at the Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism department of Maine Medical Center, Maine Health, in Scarborough, Maine.
Guillermo E. Umpierrez, MD, CDCES, MACP, FACE is a Professor of Medicine at Emory University School of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism.
Guillermo E. Umpierrez, MD, CDCES, MACP, FACE is the Chief of Diabetes and Endocrinology at Grady Health Systems in Atlanta, Georgia.
Willy Marcos Valencia, MD, MSc is an endocrinologist at the Endocrinology and Metabolism Institute, Center for Geriatric Medicine, Cleveland Clinic, in Cleveland, Ohio.
The American Association of Clinical Endocrinology consensus statement provides visual guidance in concise graphic algorithms to assist with clinical decision-making of health care professionals in the management of persons with type 2 diabetes mellitus to improve patient care.
The American Association of Clinical Endocrinology consensus statement provides a summary of details to support the visual guidance found in each algorithm for the management of persons with type 2 diabetes mellitus.
The American Association of Clinical Endocrinology selected a task force of medical experts who updated the 2020 American Association of Clinical Endocrinology Comprehensive Type 2 Diabetes Management Algorithm based on the 2022 American Association of Clinical Endocrinology Clinical Practice Guideline: Developing a Diabetes Mellitus Comprehensive Care Plan and consensus of task force authors.
The algorithm for management of persons with type 2 diabetes mellitus includes 11 distinct sections, including Principles for the Management of Type 2 Diabetes, Complications-Centric Model for the Care of Persons with Overweight/Obesity, and Prediabetes Algorithm.
The algorithm for management of persons with type 2 diabetes mellitus includes Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Disease Risk Reduction Algorithm: Dyslipidemia and Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Disease Risk Reduction Algorithm: Hypertension.
The American Association of Clinical Endocrinology represents the official position of the American Association of Clinical Endocrinology on the subject matter of type 2 diabetes mellitus management at the time of publication.
Subject matter experts who participated on the task force used their judgment and experience supported by relevant scientific evidence as available to develop the consensus statement on type 2 diabetes mellitus management.
Every effort was made to achieve consensus among the task force members who developed the consensus statement on type 2 diabetes mellitus management.
The consensus statement on type 2 diabetes mellitus management is meant to provide guidance, but it is not to be considered prescriptive for any individual patient with type 2 diabetes mellitus and cannot replace the judgment of a clinician.
Health care professionals are encouraged to use the information in the consensus statement on type 2 diabetes mellitus management in conjunction with their best clinical judgement.
The presented guidance in the consensus statement on type 2 diabetes mellitus management may not be appropriate in all situations for patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Any decision by health care professionals to apply the guidance provided in the consensus statement on type 2 diabetes mellitus management must be made in consideration of local resources and individual patient circumstances for patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus.
The 2023 diabetes algorithm update emphasizes lifestyle modification and treatment of overweight/obesity as key pillars in the management of prediabetes and diabetes mellitus.
The 2023 diabetes algorithm update highlights the importance of appropriate management of atherosclerotic risk factors of dyslipidemia and hypertension for patients with diabetes mellitus.
The algorithm includes access and cost of medications as factors related to health equity to consider in clinical decision-making for patients with diabetes mellitus.
The 2023 diabetes algorithm update includes a complication-centric approach, beyond glucose levels, to frame decisions regarding first-line pharmacologic choices for the treatment of persons with diabetes mellitus.
The algorithm includes Vaccine Recommendations for Persons with Diabetes Mellitus, which summarizes recommendations from the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
The American Association of Clinical Endocrinology is referred to as AACE.
The American Association of Endocrinology is referred to as AACE.
Adiposity-based chronic disease is referred to as ABCD.
The ankle-brachial index is referred to as ABI.
The American College of Endocrinology is referred to as ACE.
Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor is referred to as ACEi.
Alpha-glucosidase inhibitor is referred to as AGI.
Acute kidney injury is referred to as AKI.
Apolipoprotein B is referred to as apo B.
Angiotensin II receptor blocker is referred to as ARB.
Atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease is referred to as ASCVD.
The Adult Treatment Panel is referred to as ATP.
Hemoglobin A1C is referred to as A1C.