Tirzepatide is a weekly dual glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) and GLP-1 RA that has been shown to cause substantial weight loss in persons with overweight/obesity but has not received regulatory approval for this indication at this time.
Other weight-loss medications approved by the FDA, such as naltrexone-ER/bupropion-ER, short-term phentermine, or orlistat, could be considered if the above medications are not tolerated or are not accessible to the patient with prediabetes.
Hydrogel capsules, containing cellulose and citric acid, taken before meals, achieved ≥5% weight loss in a majority of participants in placebo-controlled trials, including persons with prediabetes and type 2 diabetes (T2D).
Additional devices that have regulatory approval by the FDA for the treatment of obesity, but not type 2 diabetes (T2D), include intragastric balloons, transpyloric shuttle, and gastric aspiration.
Bariatric procedures are more effective than lifestyle interventions and medications in weight reduction and should be considered in those with prediabetes with a body mass index (BMI) >35 kg/m².
For patients with prediabetes who do not meet the BMI criteria of overweight/obesity but who still require intervention for prediabetes after implementation of lifestyle modifications, pharmacologic agents with evidence of efficacy in preventing progression to type 2 diabetes (T2D) should be considered.
Metformin, pioglitazone, and acarbose have evidence of efficacy in clinical trials for preventing progression to type 2 diabetes (T2D) in persons with prediabetes.
Despite the interventions discussed above, persons with prediabetes are at high risk to progress to type 2 diabetes (T2D).
Clinicians are directed to sections on the Complications-Centric Algorithm for Glycemic Control and the Glucose-Centric Algorithm for Glycemic Control for further guidance on antihyperglycemic pharmacotherapy for persons with prediabetes.
Treatment of dyslipidemia is an essential component of Diabetes Mellitus management and prediabetes management.
The combined effects of insulin deficiency, insulin resistance, and hyperglycemia in patients with Diabetes Mellitus cause multiple disruptions in lipoprotein metabolism.
The disruptions in lipoprotein metabolism in patients with Diabetes Mellitus lead to an especially atherogenic state characterized by increased levels of apolipoprotein B-containing particles.
The atherogenic state in patients with Diabetes Mellitus is characterized by increased levels of triglyceride-rich very low-density lipoprotein, intermediate-density lipoprotein, and remnant particles.
The atherogenic state in patients with Diabetes Mellitus results in low levels of high-density lipoprotein-cholesterol and increased levels of small, dense, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol.
Additional detailed guidance for management of dyslipidemia in patients with Diabetes Mellitus is available in the 2017 AACE Guidelines for Management of Dyslipidemia and Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease.
Additional detailed guidance for management of dyslipidemia in patients with Diabetes Mellitus is available in the 2020 Algorithm on the Management of Dyslipidemia and Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease.
All adult persons with prediabetes or type 2 diabetes should be screened with a lipid panel at diagnosis and annually to assess atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease risk.
The standard lipid panel for adult persons with prediabetes or type 2 diabetes includes total cholesterol, triglyceride levels, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol.
Fasting lipid panels are not necessary for therapeutic decisions for adult persons with prediabetes or type 2 diabetes, and nonfasting lipid panels may aid patient compliance with timely blood draws.
Secondary causes of dyslipidemia in adult persons with prediabetes or type 2 diabetes should be excluded.
There may be a contributing underlying medical condition or medication in adult persons with prediabetes or type 2 diabetes that can cause dyslipidemia, and intervention—if medically appropriate—may improve or resolve the abnormalities.
Evaluation of dyslipidemia in adult persons with prediabetes or type 2 diabetes should begin with a medical, family, and nutrition history.
All medications, over-the-counter medications, and supplements of adult persons with prediabetes or type 2 diabetes should be reviewed to assess their potential impact on dyslipidemia.
Laboratory testing for thyroid, renal, and liver function may expose secondary causes of dyslipidemia in adult persons with prediabetes or type 2 diabetes.
Adult persons with prediabetes or type 2 diabetes and baseline low-density lipoprotein cholesterol >190 mg/dL should be investigated for familial hypercholesterolemia.
Adult persons with prediabetes or type 2 diabetes and extremely high triglyceride levels should be considered for a diagnosis of familial chylomicronemia syndrome.
Adult persons with prediabetes or type 2 diabetes and suspected familial hypercholesterolemia or familial chylomicronemia syndrome should be referred to a lipid specialist for assessment and management.
Overweight or obesity is a medical condition that can cause dyslipidemia in adult persons with prediabetes or type 2 diabetes.
Hyperglycemia is a medical condition that can cause dyslipidemia in adult persons with prediabetes or type 2 diabetes.
Hypothyroidism is a medical condition that can cause dyslipidemia in adult persons with prediabetes or type 2 diabetes.