Analog insulins, including detemir, glargine, or degludec, are preferred over human insulins, such as neutral protamine Hagedorn (NPH), to reduce hypoglycemia in patients with diabetes.
After basal insulin is initiated, discontinuation of Sulfonylureas (SUs) is recommended for patients with diabetes.
Fixed-dose Glucagon-Like Peptide-1 Receptor Agonist (GLP-1 RA) and basal insulin combinations can provide improved glycemic control when basal insulin alone has not achieved targets for patients with diabetes.
Rapid-acting insulin analogs are preferred over human insulin preparations, such as regular insulin, because of their comparatively earlier onset of action.
Prandial insulin can be initiated at the largest meal at 10% of the basal insulin dose or 5 units, with stepwise addition to other meals as additional glycemic control is needed for patients with diabetes.
Prandial insulin can be started at all meals simultaneously at 50% of the total daily dose divided by the number of meals for patients with diabetes.
Fixed-dose premixed insulins that combine a long-acting and short-acting insulin can also be considered for persons with diabetes who may have concerns about multiple insulins and injections.
Premixed insulin requires fewer injections than other insulin regimens for patients with diabetes, but it also has less flexibility for dosing adjustments and may increase hypoglycemia in patients with diabetes.
Premixed insulin may offer an alternative to achieve adequate glycemic control due to the simplicity of the premixed insulin regimen and increased adherence for patients with diabetes.
Basal insulin should be titrated every 2 to 3 days to reach glycemic targets with a goal fasting blood glucose of <110 mg/dL without hypoglycemia.
The basal insulin titration should be done every 3 to 5 days for patients taking insulin degludec because of the longer half-life of insulin degludec.
Patients taking basal insulin can be counseled on how to titrate basal insulin doses independently based on self-monitoring of blood glucose.
The basal insulin dose can be increased by 20% if the fasting blood glucose is >180 mg/dL.
The basal insulin dose can be increased by 10% if the fasting blood glucose is between 140 to 180 mg/dL.
The basal insulin dose can be increased by 1 unit if the fasting blood glucose is between 110 to 139 mg/dL.
The basal insulin dose should be decreased by 10% to 20% if the patient experiences fasting hypoglycemia with a fasting blood glucose <70 mg/dL.
The basal insulin dose should be decreased by 20% to 40% if the patient experiences fasting hypoglycemia with a fasting blood glucose <40 mg/dL.
The goal premeal glucose targets for patients with diabetes are 110 to 140 mg/dL.
Prandial insulin should be titrated every 2 to 3 days for patients with diabetes, based on the premeal glucose of the meal until glycemic targets are met for patients with diabetes.
One approach to titrating prandial insulin for patients with diabetes is to adjust the dose based on premeal glucose levels for patients with diabetes.
For patients with diabetes, if the pre-midday meal glucose is greater than 110 mg/dL, the morning meal dose of prandial insulin should be increased by 10% to 20%.
For patients with diabetes, if the pre-evening glucose is greater than 140 mg/dL, the midday meal dose of prandial insulin should be increased by 10% to 20%.
For patients with diabetes, if the bedtime glucose is greater than 140 mg/dL, the pre-evening meal dose of prandial insulin should be increased by 10%.
Fixed-dose insulin for patients with diabetes can be titrated by 2 units every 2 to 3 days, relying on the morning fasting blood glucose because of the presence of basal insulin in the treatment regimen for patients with diabetes.
For premeal hypoglycemia, which is characterized by a glucose level of less than 70 mg/dL, the prandial insulin dose should be adjusted using the following approach for patients with diabetes mellitus.
For patients with diabetes mellitus who experience pre-midday meal glucose levels of less than 70 mg/dL, the AM meal dose of prandial insulin should be decreased by 10% to 20%.
For patients with diabetes mellitus who experience pre-evening meal glucose levels of less than 70 mg/dL, the pre-midday meal dose of prandial insulin should be decreased by 10% to 20%.
For patients with diabetes mellitus who experience bedtime glucose levels of less than 70 mg/dL, the pre-evening meal dose of prandial insulin should be decreased by 10% to 20%.
Patients with diabetes mellitus who are on insulin, as well as their families and companions, should be educated on the symptoms and treatment of hypoglycemia, which is characterized by a glucose level of less than 70 mg/dL.
Patients with diabetes mellitus who are on insulin, as well as their families and companions, should be educated on the symptoms and treatment of severe hypoglycemia, which is characterized by a glucose level of less than 54 mg/dL.
If a patient with diabetes mellitus can safely swallow, an oral source of glucose, such as tablets or fruit juice, should be given to treat hypoglycemia.
