Lyseren is a lake in the municipalities of Enebakk in Akershus county and Spydeberg in Østfold county , Norway .
Varavu Nalla Uravu is a 1990 Indian Tamil film , directed by Visu and produced by Rajam Balachandar .
Batura III , also known as Batura Muztagh III , is a peak in Batura Muztagh of Pakistan , which is the westernmost subrange of the Karakoram range .
Ramakuppam is a village in Chittoor district of the Indian state of Andhra Pradesh .
Kurniwadi is a village in Belgaum district in Karnataka , India .
Stadion Rankhof is a football stadium in Basel , Switzerland .
Gozar is a village in Firuzeh Rural District , in the Central District of Firuzeh County , Razavi Khorasan Province , Iran .
Eslamabad, Dowreh is a village in Teshkan Rural District , Chegeni District , Dowreh County , Lorestan Province , Iran .
Alvan-e Eshareh is a village in Azadeh Rural District , Moshrageh District , Ramshir County , Khuzestan Province , Iran .
Vilakkum Velichavum is a 1978 Indian Malayalam film , directed by P. Bhaskaran and produced by Pavamani .
Gorabal is a village in Belgaum district in the southern state of Karnataka , India .
Vayasu Pilichindi is a 1978 Telugu - language film directed by C. V. Sridhar .
Kaharlyk is a town in Kiev Oblast ( province ) of Ukraine .
Paul E. Johnson taught at Princeton University , Yale University , University of Utah , and University of South Carolina .
Vilamana is a village in Kannur district in the Indian state of Kerala .
The Man with a Cross is a 1943 Italian war film directed by Roberto Rossellini and starring Alberto Tavazzi , Roswita Schmidt and Attilio Dottesio .
Schwaz Heliport is a public use heliport located 15 nm north - northwest of Schwaz , Tirol , Austria .
Cheshmeh Qaleh is a village in Satar Rural District , Kolyai District , Sonqor County , Kermanshah Province , Iran .
San Miguel Huautla is a town and municipality in Oaxaca in south - western Mexico .
Dravograd Sports Centre is a multi - purpose stadium in Dravograd , Slovenia .
Bidun Dar, Bardsir is a village in Lalehzar Rural District , Lalehzar District , Bardsir County , Kerman Province , Iran .
Valfajar is a village in Liravi-ye Miyani Rural District , Imam Hassan District , Deylam County , Bushehr Province , Iran .
Making Sandwiches is a short film written and directed by American film star Sandra Bullock .
Qeshlaq-e Diz is a village in Shal Rural District , Shahrud District , Khalkhal County , Ardabil Province , Iran .
Javadiyeh, Markazi is a village in Chahar Cheshmeh Rural District , Kamareh District , Khomeyn County , Markazi Province , Iran .
Idalhond is a village in Belagavi district in the southern state of Karnataka , India .
Anjirak, Kermanshah is a village in Jalalvand Rural District , Firuzabad District , Kermanshah County , Kermanshah Province , Iran .
Track of the Cat is a 1954 Warnercolor Western film directed by William A. Wellman and starring Robert Mitchum and Teresa Wright .
Mellado competed in the 1988 Summer Olympics in Seoul , South Korea , representing Santiago Mellado birth nation , El Salvador , in the decathlon .
Ranadheera is a 1988 Indian Kannada language musical action film starring V. Ravichandran and Kushboo in the lead roles .
Main Zinda Hoon is a 1988 Hindi drama film written and directed by Sudhir Mishra , starring Rajendra Gupta , Pankaj Kapur , Deepti Naval and Alok Nath .
Keezhamaligai is a village in the Sendurai taluk of Ariyalur district , Tamil Nadu , India .
Kate Knuth has degrees from the University of Chicago and Oxford University , and attended the University of Oslo on a Fulbright Scholarship .
Tila Kenar is a village in Kelarabad Rural District , Kelarabad District , Abbasabad County , Mazandaran Province , Iran .
Jacques Presser attended the University of Amsterdam after finishing a commercial vocational college and having worked in an office for two years .
Monster Hunt is a 2015 Chinese - Hong Kong 3D fantasy action comedy adventure film directed by Raman Hui , and starring Bai Baihe and Jing Boran .
Oryad Rural District is a rural district in the Central District of Mahneshan County , Zanjan Province , Iran .
Tork-e Gharbi Rural District is a rural district in Jowkar District , Malayer County , Hamadan Province , Iran .
Rider from Tucson is an RKO Pictures 1950 Western film directed by Lesley Selander and starring Tim Holt and Richard Martin .
Soltaniyeh, Razavi Khorasan is a village in Pas Kalut Rural District , in the Central District of Gonabad County , Razavi Khorasan Province , Iran .
A Lonely Place to Die is a 2011 British adventure crime thriller film directed by Julian Gilbey and based on a screenplay from Julian and Will Gilbey .
Orgasmo is a 1969 " giallo " film starring Carroll Baker and Lou Castel and directed by Umberto Lenzi .
Richard R. Nelson ( born 1930 in New York City ) is an American professor of economics at Columbia University .
Shobaraj is a 1986 Indian Malayalam action thriller film directed by J. Sasikumar and starring Mohanlal and Madhavi .
Adguri is a small town in Arghakhanchi District in the Lumbini Zone of southern Nepal .
The Last Remake of Beau Geste starred and was also directed and co - written by Marty Feldman .
Aq Ziarat is a village in Kenarporuzh Rural District , in the Central District of Salmas County , West Azerbaijan Province , Iran .
Marcos Bonifacio da Rocha is a Brazilian football player .
Varzaneh is the capital city of Bon Rud District , in Isfahan County , Isfahan Province , Iran .
Bayendar is a village in Mojezat Rural District , in the Central District of Zanjan County , Zanjan Province , Iran .
Born in Santa Coloma de Gramenet , Barcelona , Catalonia , Luis Aloy Vidal played as a midfielder for FC Barcelona between 1950 and 1954 .
Buddy Buddy is a 1981 American comedy film directed by Billy Wilder that stars Jack Lemmon and Walter Matthau .
Gajurmukhi is a town and Village Development Committee in Ilam District in the Mechi Zone of eastern Nepal .
Qayed Ali is a village in Padena-ye Sofla Rural District , Padena District , Semirom County , Isfahan Province , Iran .
Shuzo Yajima was a Japanese water polo player who competed in the 1968 Summer Olympics and in the 1972 Summer Olympics .
Osku ( , also Romanized as Oskū ; also known as Uzku and Yuzki ) is a city and capital of Osku County , East Azerbaijan Province , Iran .
The Prince of Arcadia is a 1932 Austrian-German romance film directed by Karl Hartl and starring Willi Forst , Liane Haid and Hedwig Bleibtreu .
Kulamanatti is a village in Belgaum district in Karnataka , India .
Yayamari is a mountain in the Vilcanota mountain range in the Andes of Peru , about high .
Qaleh-ye Soltan is a village in Shahid Modarres Rural District , in the Central District of Shushtar County , Khuzestan Province , Iran .
My New Partner II is a 1990 French comedy film directed by Claude Zidi , starring Philippe Noiret and Thierry Lhermitte .
Shalamzar, Alborz is a village in Hiv Rural District , in the Central District of Savojbolagh County , Alborz Province , Iran .
Kokradi ( Kokrady ) is an agricultural village in Dakshina Kannada ( South Canara district ) of Karnataka State in India .
Chahriq Rural District is a rural district in Kuhsar District , Salmas County , West Azerbaijan Province , Iran .
Dalbar Malek Baqar is a village in Khavashod Rural District , Rud Ab District , Sabzevar County , Razavi Khorasan Province , Iran .
Veerapur is a village in Belgaum district in the southern state of Karnataka , India .
Give Us the Moon is a 1944 British comedy film directed and written by Val Guest and starring Vic Oliver , Margaret Lockwood , and Peter Graves .
Yuri Nagibin died in Moscow on June 17 , 1994 and was buried at Novodevichy Cemetery .
Banuband is a village in Tazian Rural District , in the Central District of Bandar Abbas County , Hormozgan Province , Iran .
Anjireh, Hormozgan is a village in Mehran Rural District , in the Central District of Bandar Lengeh County , Hormozgan Province , Iran .
Qatar Chah is a village in Khangiran Rural District , in the Central District of Sarakhs County , Razavi Khorasan Province , Iran .
Pavilion Lake is a lake in Marble Canyon , British Columbia , Canada .
Mangushi is a village in Buzi Rural District , in the Central District of Shadegan County , Khuzestan Province , Iran .
The Wonderful Years is a 1980 West German drama film directed by Reiner Kunze and starring Gabi Marr , Martin May , Dietrich Mattausch and Christine Wodetzky .
Story of My Death is a film directed by Albert Serra .
Javaliqan is a village in Jereh Rural District , Jereh and Baladeh District , Kazerun County , Fars Province , Iran .
Paris Calling is a 1941 war film noir directed by Edwin L. Marin and starring Randolph Scott , Elisabeth Bergner , and Basil Rathbone .
Zavala District is a district of Inhambane Province in south - east Mozambique .
Dom Shahr is a village in Gurband Rural District , in the Central District of Minab County , Hormozgan Province , Iran .
Karl Stieler ( December 15 , 1842 in Munich , Germany – April 12 , 1885 in Munich ) was a German lawyer and author .
Cheppu is a 1987 Malayalam language film made in India , directed by Priyadarshan and starring Mohanlal .
Bagh-e Dehneh is a village in Baqeran Rural District , in the Central District of Birjand County , South Khorasan Province , Iran .
Chaypareh-ye Pain Rural District is a rural district in Zanjanrud District , Zanjan County , Zanjan Province , Iran .
Chirag Kahan Roshni Kahan ( Hindi : चिराग कहाँ रोशनी कहाँ ; – is a 1959 Indian Bollywood film directed and produced by Devendra Goel .
Kattusseri is a small village in Alathur Taluk , in the Palakkad district of Kerala , south India .
Tenom is the capital of the Tenom District in the Interior Division of Sabah , Malaysia .
Safayyeh is a city and capital of Ferdows District , in Rafsanjan County , Kerman Province , Iran .
El Paso County Coliseum is a 6,500-seat multi - purpose arena located in El Paso, Texas .
Kiakola Rural District is a rural district in the Central District of Simorgh County , Mazandaran Province , Iran .
Gonnagar is a village in Belgaum district in the southern state of Karnataka , India .
Kabgan Rural District is a rural district in Kaki District , Dashti County , Bushehr Province , Iran .
Qaleh-ye Tasian is a village in Gavork-e Nalin Rural District , Vazineh District , Sardasht County , West Azerbaijan Province , Iran .
Too Late for Tears is a 1949 film noir crime film directed by Byron Haskin and starring Lizabeth Scott , Don DeFore , Dan Duryea and Arthur Kennedy .
Kansas City Confidential is a 1952 American film noir and crime film directed by Phil Karlson starring John Payne and Coleen Gray .
Suteh, Ramsar is a village in Sakht Sar Rural District , in the Central District of Ramsar County , Mazandaran Province , Iran .
Abuse of Weakness is a 2013 semi - autobiographical film written and directed by Catherine Breillat .
Flowers from Nice is a 1936 Austrian musical comedy film directed by Augusto Genina and starring Erna Sack , Friedl Czepa and Karl Schönböck .
Muayan Halaili is an Israeli professional association football player .
Kakane Wadi is a village in Parner taluka in Ahmednagar district of state of Maharashtra , India .
The New York Ripper is a 1982 Italian " giallo " film directed Lucio Fulci .
The Unguarded Hour is a 1936 film starring Loretta Young and Franchot Tone under the direction of Sam Wood .
The Range Feud is a 1931 American Pre - Code Western film directed by D. Ross Lederman that stars Buck Jones and John Wayne .
Victoria the Great is a 1937 British historical film directed by Herbert Wilcox and starring Anna Neagle , Anton Walbrook and Walter Rilla .
Shonbeh is a city in and capital of Shonbeh and Tasuj District , in Dashti County , Bushehr Province , Iran .
The Rough and the Smooth is a 1959 British drama film directed by Robert Siodmak and starring Nadja Tiller , Tony Britton , William Bendix and Edward Chapman .
Vattinagulapally is a village and panchayat in Ranga Reddy district , Telangana , India .
Jegenstorf Castle is a castle in the municipality of Jegenstorf of the Canton of Bern in Switzerland .
Sulqan Rural District is a rural district in Kan District , Tehran County , Tehran Province , Iran .
Aq Bolagh Rural District is a rural district in Sojas Rud District , Khodabandeh County , Zanjan Province , Iran .
Dehaj is a city and capital of Dehaj District , in Shahr-e Babak County , Kerman Province , Iran .
Chuqipata is a mountain in the Andes of southern Peru , about high .
McMillan Island is an island in the Fraser River , British Columbia , Canada , also known as McMillan Slough ..
Hanjanatti is a village in Belgaum district in the southern state of Karnataka , India .
Devrukh is a town in the tehsil of Sangameshwar in the Ratnagiri district of the Indian state of Maharashtra .
Ali Nazar, West Azerbaijan is a village in Zangebar Rural District , in the Central District of Poldasht County , West Azerbaijan Province , Iran .
Sleeping with the Enemy is a 1991 American romantic psychological thriller film directed by Joseph Ruben and starring Julia Roberts , Patrick Bergin and Kevin Anderson .
Herman Diamand graduated in Lviv , then studied at the University of Vienna , Lviv and Chernivtsi and where in 1896 Herman Diamand obtained a doctorate .
Ali Sadr Rural District is a rural district in Gol Tappeh District , Kabudarahang County , Hamadan Province , Iran .
M. N. Kaul was born in Kashmir and studied at University of Cambridge and London School of Economics .
Caxambu is a Brazilian municipality in Minas Gerais .
Frans De Mulder ( 17 December 1937 in Kruishoutem – 5 March 2001 in Deinze ) was a professional road racing cyclist from Belgium between 1958 and 1963 .
Mrs Henderson Presents is a 2005 British biographical film written by American playwright Martin Sherman and directed by Stephen Frears .
Felix Braun ( 4 November 1885 , Vienna – 29 November 1973 , Klosterneuburg , Lower Austria ) was an Austrian writer .
Game on Board is a 1936 German comedy crime film directed by Herbert Selpin and starring Viktor de Kowa , Susi Lanner and Alfred Abel .
Zvenigora is a 1928 Soviet silent film by Ukrainian director Alexander Dovzhenko , first shown on April 13 , 1928 .
Hoag was elected as a Democrat to the Forty - first Congress and served from March 4 , 1869 , until Truman H. Hoag death in Washington, D.C.
Colonial Peak is a mountain in the North Cascades of Washington , United States .
Kordian District is a district in Jahrom County , Fars Province , Iran .
Tepemaxalco is a town and municipality in Puebla in south - eastern Mexico .
Hiware Korda is a village in Parner taluka in Ahmednagar district of state of Maharashtra , India .
The Muppets Take Manhattan is a 1984 American musical comedy film directed by Frank Oz .
Polideportivo Municipal de Manises is a multi - purpose stadium in Manises , Spain .
Krnjin is a village in the municipality of Tomislavgrad , Bosnia and Herzegovina .
Evil Dead II is a 1987 American comedy horror film directed by Sam Raimi and a parody sequel to the 1981 horror film " The Evil Dead " .
A native of Pesaro , he was extremely influential at the time for Nicola Sabbatini pioneering and inventive designs of theater , stage set , lighting and stage machinery .
Love Is Eternal While It Lasts is a 2004 Italian romantic comedy film written , directed and starred by Carlo Verdone .
Eram Rural District is a rural district in Eram District , Dashtestan County , Bushehr Province , Iran .
Little Buddha is a 1993 Italian - French - British drama film directed by Bernardo Bertolucci and starring Chris Isaak , Bridget Fonda and Keanu Reeves as Prince Siddhartha .
Rocky IV is a 1985 American sports drama film written , directed by , and starring Sylvester Stallone .
S*P*Y*S is a 1974 comedy directed by Irvin Kershner and starring Elliott Gould , Donald Sutherland , and Zouzou .
In 2001 , Edwin Brienen wrote , directed , and edited Edwin Brienen debut feature film " Terrorama ! "
Azadeh Rural District is a rural district in Moshrageh District , Ramshir County , Khuzestan Province , Iran .
Marqad is a village in Buin Rural District , Nanur District , Baneh County , Kurdistan Province , Iran .
Jade Goddess of Mercy or Goddess of Mercy is a 2003 film directed by Ann Hui , starring Zhao Wei and Nicholas Tse .
Dashti-ye Hoseyn Aqa is a village in Lalar and Katak Rural District , Chelo District , Andika County , Khuzestan Province , Iran .
Cham Konar, Shushtar is a village in Shahid Modarres Rural District , in the Central District of Shushtar County , Khuzestan Province , Iran .
Third Man on the Mountain is a 1959 American Walt Disney Productions film directed by Ken Annakin and starring Michael Rennie and James MacArthur .
Pannaikadu is a panchayat town in Dindigul district in the Indian state of Tamil Nadu .
Dasht-e Sar Rural District was a rural district in Dabudasht District , Amol County , Mazandaran Province , Iran .
Freeze Die Come to Life is a 1989 Soviet drama film directed by Vitali Kanevsky .
Macclesfield railway station is a main line station serving the Cheshire town of Macclesfield .
A Walk with Love and Death is a 1969 DeLuxe Color romantic , drama film directed by John Huston .
Kundargi is a village in Belgaum district in Karnataka , India .
Little Salt Spring is an archaeological and paleontological site in North Port , Florida , United States .
Alaginayagipuram is a village in the Pattukkottai taluk of Thanjavur district , Tamil Nadu , India .
Rah Daneh is a village in Beygom Qaleh Rural District , in the Central District of Naqadeh County , West Azerbaijan Province , Iran .
Drishyam is a 2013 Indian Malayalam-language drama-thriller film written and directed by Jeethu Joseph .
Mount Drum is a stratovolcano in the Wrangell Mountains of east - central Alaska in the United States .
Anivsky District is an administrative district of Sakhalin Oblast , Russia ; one of the seventeen in the oblast .
Texada Island is the largest island in the Strait of Georgia of British Columbia , Canada .
Kuvagam is a village in the Udayarpalayam taluk of Ariyalur district , Tamil Nadu , India .
El Hierro Airport is the only existing airport on the Island of El Hierro , Spain .
Leskovec, Novo Mesto ( or ) is a settlement in the hills east of Novo Mesto in southeastern Slovenia .
Dharmatti is a village in Belgaum district in the southern state of Karnataka , India .
New Fist of Fury is a 1976 Hong Kong martial arts film directed by Lo Wei and starring Jackie Chan .
If Paris Were Told to Us is a 1956 French historical film directed and written by Sacha Guitry .
Vishnu-Devaa stars Sunny Deol , Aditya Pancholi , Neelam Kothari and Sangeeta Bijlani in pivotal roles .
Golabar Rural District is a rural district in the Central District of Ijrud County , Zanjan Province , Iran .
Mashhadi, Khuzestan is a village in Shahid Modarres Rural District , in the Central District of Shushtar County , Khuzestan Province , Iran .
Bertin Tomou Bayard ( born August 8 , 1978 in Bafoussam ) is a former Cameroonian former football ( soccer ) striker .
Stadion Florian Krygier is a multi - use stadium in Szczecin , Poland .
Gonbad Zia is a village in Chenaran Rural District , in the Central District of Chenaran County , Razavi Khorasan Province , Iran .
The Plainsman is a 1936 American Western film directed by Cecil B. DeMille and starring Gary Cooper and Jean Arthur .
Somehow Good is a 1927 British silent drama film directed by Jack Raymond and starring Fay Compton , Stewart Rome and Dorothy Boyd .
Jaffal, Khuzestan is a village in Jaffal Rural District , in the Central District of Shadegan County , Khuzestan Province , Iran .
Laura Birn was born in Helsinki , Finland .
Pitusiray is a mountain in the Urubamba mountain range in the Andes of Peru .
The Sons of Katie Elder is a 1965 Technicolor Western Panavision film directed by Henry Hathaway and starring John Wayne and Dean Martin .
Danger Route is a 1967 British spy film directed by Seth Holt for Amicus Productions and starring Richard Johnson as Jonas Wilde , Carol Lynley and Barbara Bouchet .
Born in Virum , Klaus Berggreen started playing football at nearby club Lyngby Boldklub at the age of six .
Strange Illusion is a 1945 film noir crime film directed by Edgar G. Ulmer and starring Jimmy Lydon , Warren William and Sally Eilers .
Rihards Dubra ( born 28 February 1964 in Riga , Latvian SSR , Soviet Union ) is a Latvian composer .
Belegali is a village in Dharwad district of Karnataka , India .
Gatewadi is a village in Parner taluka in Ahmednagar district of state of Maharashtra , India .
Mehdiabad, Khomeyn is a village in Chahar Cheshmeh Rural District , Kamareh District , Khomeyn County , Markazi Province , Iran .
Black Holiday is a 1973 Italian political drama film directed by Marco Leto and starring Adolfo Celi .
The Flying Doctor is a 1936 Australian - British drama film directed by Miles Mander and starring Charles Farrell , Mary Maguire and James Raglan .
Fulagaddi is a village in Belgaum district in the southern state of Karnataka , India .
Kabut Sutra Ungu is a 1979 Indonesian film directed by Sjumandjaja and starring Jenny Rachman , Roy Marten , and El Manik .
Watch Your Stern is a 1960 British comedy film directed by Gerald Thomas and starring Kenneth Connor , Eric Barker and Leslie Phillips .
Finding Mercy is a 2013 Nigerian drama film produced and directed by Desmond Elliot , and starring Rita Dominic , Blossom Chukwujekwu , Uti Nwachukwu and Chioma Chukwuka .
Ab Barik, Khuzestan is a village in Tolbozan Rural District , Golgir District , Masjed Soleyman County , Khuzestan Province , Iran .
Albrecht Schuch was born in 1985 in Jena , East Germany .
Hasan Abdali is a village in Mojezat Rural District , in the Central District of Zanjan County , Zanjan Province , Iran .
Sharabian is a city in Mehraban District , Sarab County , East Azerbaijan Province , Iran .
Nutty, Naughty Chateau is a 1963 French - Italian comedy film directed by Roger Vadim starring Monica Vitti .
Notes of Love is a 1998 Italian - French romance film directed by Mimmo Calopresti .
Giriyal is a village in Dharwad district of Karnataka , India .
Chal Gonbad is a village in Neyzar Rural District , Salafchegan District , Qom County , Qom Province , Iran .
Datanal is a village in Dharwad district of Karnataka , India .
