Examples include exenatide (an incretin hormone), lixisenatide, liraglutide, dulaglutide, albiglutide, and semaglutide.
Formulations are available for dosing twice a day, once a day, and weekly.
All GLP-1 agonists are given as subcutaneous injections, and semaglutide is also available in oral form.
The most common adverse effects of GLP-1 agonists are gastrointestinal, especially nausea and vomiting.
GLP-1 agonists also cause a slight increase in the risk of pancreatitis.
They are contraindicated in patients with a personal or family history of medullary thyroid cancer because an increased risk of this cancer has occurred in tested rodents.
Tirzepatide, a GIP/GLP-1 receptor agonist, is available for the treatment of type 2 diabetes.
It is a peptide that acts as a receptor agonist for the GIP and GLP-1 receptors.
GIP and GLP-1 are incretins that are produced in the small intestine.
Tirzepatide increases glucose-dependent insulin secretion, decreases glucagon secretion, and slows gastric emptying.
It also decreases appetite and induces weight loss.
Tirzepatide is used for the treatment of obesity in adults with diabetes, and in combination with pioglitazone for metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease.
The amylin analog pramlintide mimics amylin, a pancreatic beta-cell hormone that helps regulate postprandial glucose levels.
Pramlintide suppresses postprandial glucagon secretion, slows gastric emptying, and promotes satiety.
It is given by injection and is used in combination with mealtime insulin.
Patients with type 1 diabetes are given 30 to 60 mcg subcutaneously before meals, and those with type 2 diabetes are given 120 mcg.
Teplizumab is a monoclonal antibody that binds to CD3 cell surface antigens on T cells, which leads to an increase in the proportion of regulatory T cells and exhausted CD8+ T cells and attenuates the autoimmune response that leads to beta-cell destruction.
Trials have shown that teplizumab can prolong the time to diagnosis of type 1 diabetes and preserve beta-cell function, but they have not shown significant improvement in glycemic control or insulin dosing requirement.
In patients with type 1 stage 2 diabetes (dysglycemia without overt symptoms), when given as an intravenous infusion daily for 14 days it has also been shown to delay the onset of symptomatic type 1 diabetes for an average of 2 years.
Adverse effects include cytokine release syndrome manifested by fever, nausea, fatigue, headache, myalgia, arthralgia, and elevated liver enzymes.
Other serious adverse effects include lymphopenia and hypersensitivity.
Pharmacologic measures to prevent or treat long-term complications of diabetes mellitus are critical, including Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs).
ACE inhibitors or ARBs are indicated for patients with diabetes and evidence of chronic kidney disease (CKD) (decreased glomerular filtration rate or albuminuria), even in the absence of hypertension.
They are the first-line treatment for patients with diabetes and hypertension regardless of CKD status.
A nonsteroidal mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist (eg, finerenone) is recommended for patients with CKD and persistent albuminuria despite maximal ACE inhibitor or ARB therapy.
ACE inhibitors also prevent cardiovascular events in patients with diabetes mellitus.
Treatment with an ACE inhibitor or ARB is recommended in patients with known atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD) for secondary prevention.
Both SGLT2 inhibitors and GLP-1 receptor agonists provide protection against cardiovascular and kidney disease in addition to antihyperglycemic effects.
SGLT2-inhibitors are recommended for patients with diabetes and CKD, while GLP-1 receptor agonists are often used in patients with diabetes and predominant cardiovascular risk.
Aspirin 81 to 325 mg once a day provides cardiovascular protection.
Aspirin is recommended for secondary prevention in all patients with a history of ASCVD.
The benefits of aspirin in patients without established cardiovascular disease (ie, for primary prevention) are less clear.
Aspirin might be considered for primary prevention in patients with diabetes who are ≥ 50 years of age and have at least one additional risk factor for ASCVD and are not at increased risk of bleeding.
In patients > 70 years, risk of bleeding may outweigh benefits of primary prevention.
Statins are recommended for all patients with diabetes 40 to 75 years of age.
Moderate- to high-intensity treatment is used, and a high-intensity statin (atorvastatin, rosuvastatin) is recommended for patients at higher ASCVD risk.
For all patients with diabetes and established ASCVD or at very high risk for ASCVD, it is also reasonable to target a low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol level < 70 mg/dL (1.81 mol/L) with maximally tolerated statin and addition of ezetimibe or a proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK-9) inhibitor if necessary.
In addition, ezetimibe or PCSK-9 inhibitor therapy should be used in patients who are intolerant of statin therapy (see table Statins for ASCVD Prevention).
For patients < 40 years or > 75 years, statins are given based upon individual assessment of the risk:benefit ratio and patient preference.
Patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus tend to have high levels of triglycerides and small, dense LDL cholesterol and low levels of HDL cholesterol; they should receive aggressive treatment.
The latest recommendation from the American Diabetes Association suggests a target LDL < 55 mg/dL (1.42 mmol/L).
